THE

IN

r

DIAN PENAL CODE, 1860

ACT NO. 45 OF 1860 1*

[6th October, 1860.]

CHAPTE

INTROD

P

UCTION

CHAPT

INTROD

ER I

UCTION

reamble.-WHEREAS it is expedient to provide a general Penal Code
for 2* [India];

It is enacted as follows:--

Title and extent of operation of the Code.

call

1.

led

the Indian Penal Code,

and

Title and extent of operation of the Code.--This Act shall be

shall 3*[extend to the whole of

India 4*[except the State of Jammu and Kashmir]].

Punishment of offences committed within India.

2. Punishment of offences commit
sha be liable to punishment under
every act
sha be guilty within 5*[India] 6****,
3.

ted within India.--Every person
this Code and not otherwise for

or omission contrary to the provisions thereof, of which he

Punishment of offences committed beyond, but which by law may be tried
within, India.


3. Punishment of offences committed beyond, but which by law may
be tried within, India.--Any person liable, by any 7*[Indian law],
to be tried for an offence committed beyond 5*[India] shall be
dealt with according to the provisions of this Code for any act
committed beyond 5*[India] in the same manner as if such act had
been committed within 5*[India].

Extension of Code to extra-territorial offences.

8*[4. Extension of Code to extra-territorial offences.-—-The
provisions of this Code apply also to any offence committed by--

9*[(1) any citizen of India in any place without and
beyond India;

(2) any person on any ship or aircraft registered in India
wherever it may be.]

1. The Act has been amended in its application to Madras by
Madras Act 25 of 1960, U. P. by U. P. Acts 31 of 1961, 29 of 1970
and 47 of 1975, Andhra Pradesh by Andhra Pradesh Act 16 of 1968,
Maharashtra by Maharashtra Act 19 of 1971, Mysore by Mysore Act 8
of 1972, West Bengal by West Bengal Act 42 of 1973.

The Act has been extended to Goa, Daman and Diu with
modifications by Reg. 12 of 1962, s. 3 and Sch., extended to and
brought into force in Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963,
s. 2 and Sch. I (w.e.f. 1-7-1965) and to Laccadive, Minicoy and
Amindivi Islands by Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-10-
1967).

The Act comes into force in Pondicherry vide Reg. 7 of 1963,
s. 3 and Sch. I (w.e.f. 1-10-1963).

2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the whole of
India except Part B States".

3. Subs. by the A. O. 1948, for "take effect * * * throughout
British India". The words and figures "on and from the first day
of May, 1861" occurring between the words “effect" and

"throughout" were rep. by Act 12 of 1891.

4. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for “except Part B
States".

5. Subs. by s. 3 and Sch., ibid., for "the States".

6. The words and figures "on or after the said first day of May,

1861" omitted by Act 12 of 1891.

7. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for "law passed by the Governor-General
of India in Council”.


8. Subs. by Act 4 of 1898, s. 2, for the original s. 4.

9. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for the original cls. (1) to (4).

102

Explanation.

Explanation.--In this section the word "offence" includes every
act committed outside 1*[India] which, if committed in 1* [India] would
be punishable under this Code.

2* [Illustration]

3***A, 4*[who is 5*[a citizen of India]], commits a murder in
Uganda. He can be tried and convicted of murder in any place in
1* [India] in which he may be found.

6* * * * *

Certain laws not to be affected by this Act.

7*[5. Certain laws not to be affected by this Act.--Nothing in
this Act shall affect the provisions of any Act for punishing mutiny
and desertion of officers, soldiers, sailors or airmen in the service
of the Government of India or the provision of any special or local
law. ]

CHAPTER II

GENERAL EXPLANATIONS

CHAPTER II

GENERAL EXPLANATIONS

Definitions in the Code to be understood subject to exceptions.

6. Definitions in the Code to be understood subject to
exceptions.-—-Throughout this Code every definition of an offence,
every penal provision and every illustration of every such definition
or penal provision, shall be understood subject to the exceptions



contained in the Chapter ntitled "General Exceptions", though those
exceptions are not repeated in such definition, penal provision, or
illustration.
Tllustrations

(a) The sections, in this Code, which contain definitions of
offences, do not express that a child under seven years of age cannot
commit such offences; but the definitions are to be understood subject
to th general exception which provides that nothing shall be an

offence which done by chil

(b)

confinement;

A, a police-officer,
committed murder. Here A is not gui
for he was bound by
within th general except

case falls
is an offence which is done by a person who

without warrant,
lity of
law to apprehend Z,

ld under seven years of age.

apprehends Z who has
the offence of wrongful
and therefore the
Lon which provides that "nothing

is bound by law to do it".

7.
Sense of expression once explained.

7. Sense of expression once explained.--Every expression which is
explained in any part of this Code, is used in every part of this Code

in conformity with the explanation.

include the

its derivatives are used of any

appears from the context, words

plural number, and words

8.
Gender.
8. Gender.--The pronoun "he" and
person, whether male or femal
9.
Number.
9. Number.--Unless the contrary
importing the singular number
importing the plural number include the singular number.
10.

"Man" .

"Woman".


10. "Man". "Woman".--The word "man" denotes a male human being of
any age; the word "woman" denotes a female human being of any age.
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the States".
2. Subs. by Act 36 of 1957, s.3 and Sch. II, for "Illustrations".
3. The brackets and letter “6(a)' omitted by s. 3 and Sch. II, ibid.
4. Subs. by the A. O. 1948, for "a coolie, who is a Native Indian
subject".
5. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for "a British subject of Indian
domicile".
6. Tllustrations (b), (c) and (d) were rep. by the A. O. 1950.
7. Subs., ibid., for the former s. 5.
103
11.
"Person".
11. "Person".-—-The word "person" includes any Company or
Association or body of persons, whether incorporated or not.
12.
"Public".
12. "Public".--The word "public" includes any class of the public

or any community.

13.

[Definition

14.

"Servant of

1*[14.

Government"
employed in

of "Queen".] Rep. by the A. O. 1950.
Government".

"Servant of Government".--Th words "servant of
denot any officer or servant continued, appointed or

India by or under the authority of Government. ]



15.

[Definition of "British India".] Rep. by the A. O. 1937.
16.
Definition of "Government of India".] Rep., ibid.
17.
"Government".
2* [17 "Government".--The word "Government" denotes th Central
Government or the Government of a 3****State.]
18.
"India".
4*[18. “"India".--"India" means the territory of India excluding
the State of Jammu and Kashmir. ]
19.
"Judge".
19. "Judge".--The word "Judge" denotes not only every person who

is officially designated as a Judge, but also every person.

who is empowered by law to give, in any legal proceeding,

or criminal, a definitive judgment, or a judgment which,

if on

appealed against, would be definitive, or a judgment which,

confirmed by some other authority, would be definitive, or

who is one of a body of persons, which body of persons

empowered by law to give such a judgment.

Illustrations

(a) A collector exercising jurisdiction in a suit under Act 10

1859, is a Judge.

civil

ot
if

of

(ob) A Magistrate exercising jurisdiction in respect of a charge



on which he has power to sentence to fine or imprisonment with or
without appeal, is a Judge.

(c) A member of a panchayat which has power, under 5*Regulation
VII, 1816, of the Madras Code, to try and determine suit, is a Judge.

(d) A Magistrate exercising jurisdiction in respect of a charge
on which he has power only to commit for trial to another Court, is
not a Judge.

20.

"Court of Justice".

20. "Court of Justice".--The words "Court of Jutsice" denote a
Judge who is empowered by law to act judicially alone, or a body of
Judges which is empowered by law to act judicially as a body, when
such Judge or body of Judges is acting judicially.

Illustration

A Panchayat acting under 5*Regulation VII, 1816, of the Madras
Code, having power to try and determine suits, is a Court of Justice.

1. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for s. 14.

2. Subs., ibid., for s. 17.

3. The words and letter "Part A" omitted by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and
Sch.

4. Subs. by s. 3 and Sch., ibid., for s. 18.

5. Rep. by the Madras Civil Courts Act, 1873 (3 of 1873).

104

21.

"Public servant".

21. "Public servant".--The words "public servant" denote a person
falling under any of the descriptions hereinafter following, namely:--

1* * * * *

Second.-—-Every Commissioned Officer in the Military,
2* [Naval or Air] Forces 3*[4**** of India];

5*[Third.--Every Judge including any person empowered by
law to discharge, whether by himself or as a member of any body



of persons.

any adjudicatory functions; ]

Fourth.-——Every officer of a Court of Justice
6*[ (including a liquidator, receiver or commissioner) ] whose duty
it is, as such officer, to investigate or report on any matter of
law or fact, or to make, authenticate, or keep any document, or
to take charge or dispose of any property, or to execute any
judicial process, or to administer any oath, or to interpret, or
to preserve order in the Court, and every person specially
authorized by a Court of Justice to perform any of such duties;

Fifth.--Every juryman, assessor, or member of a panchayat

assisting a Court of Justice or public servant;

iS)
or matter
of Justice,

Seventh.

ixth.--Every arbitrator
has been

Every person

which he is

is, as
offences,
health,

take, receive,
Government], or
behalf of
process,
the pecuniary
authenticate or
interests of
of any law for
7* [the Government]

Tenth.--Every officer

Eighth.--Every officer
such officer,

Ninth.--Every officer
keep
to make
7* [the Government],
or to investigate,
interests
keep any document
7* [the Government],
the protection

or

or other

who holds

whose duty
expend
any survey,

or to
or to report,
of
or to

of the

Bxxxx >

whose duty it

take, receive,
assessment or to
purpose of any
authenticate or

keep or
levy

vill

lage,
keep any document for
rights of the people of any village,

xpend any property,
any rate or tax
town or

di

assess
execute
on any matter affecting
7* [the Govern
relating

pecu

is,

person to whom
referred for decision or report by
or by any other competent public authority;

any office

of 7* [the Government]
to prevent offences,
to bring offenders to justice,
safety or convenience;

to give

it is as suc
any property on behalf of 7*[the
ment or

ment],
to
prevent
niary

as such officer,

any cause
any Court

by virtue of

mpowered to place or keep any person in confinement;

whose duty it
information of

or to protect the public

h officer, to
contract on

a revenue—

ny
or to make.
he pecuniary
he infraction
interests of

t
t

to

to make any survey or

for any

strict,

the ascertaining
town or district;

secular common
or to make,
of the

Cl. First omitted by the A. O. 1950.
Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and Sch. I, for
Subs. by the A. OO. 1948, for

The words
Subs.

Ins. by s. 2, ibid.

by Act 40 of 1964,

"of the Dominion" omitted by the A. O.

s. 2, for cl.

Third.

"or Naval".

"of the Queen while serving under
any Government in British India or the Crown Representati

ve W

1950.


7. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for "the Crown".
8. Certain words omitted by Act 40 of 1964,
105

1* [Eleventh.--Every person who ho

of which h

an electoral

election; ]

2*[

Ss.

2.

lds any office in virtue

is empowered to prepare, publish, maintain or revise

lL roll or to conduct an election or part of an
Twelfth.—--Every person

(a) in the service or pay of the Government or

remunerated by fees or commission for the performance of any
public duty by the Government;

State Act
of the Companies Act,

(b)
corporation established by or under a Central,
or a Government company as defined in section 617
(1 of 1956).]

in

the service of

or pay

1956

a local authority, a

Provincial or

any of the above

Illustration
A Municipal Commissioner is a public servant.
Explanation 1.--Persons falling under
descriptions are public servants,

or not.

Exp

anation 2.

Wherever

the words

whether appointed by the Government

Lc servant" occur, they

shall be understood of every person who is in actual possession of the

situation of

h

3% [
the purpose

to which

4x

22.

a public
is right to hold that situation.

is by,

Explanation 3.--The word "election"
of selecting
other public authority,
or under,

"Movable property".

servant, whatever lega

1 defect ther

members of
of whatever character,

*

denotes
any legislative,

may be in

election for
municipal or
the method of selection

an

any law prescribed as by election.]

*

22. “Movable property".--The words "movable property" are
intended to include corporeal property of every description, except
land and things attached to the earth or permanently fastened to

anything which is attached to the earth.

23.


"Wrongful gain".

23. "Wrongful gain".--"Wrongful gain" is gain by unlawful means
of property to which the person gaining is not legally entitled.

"Wrongful loss".

"Wrongful loss".--"Wrongful loss" is the loss by unlawful means
of property to which the person losing it is legally entitled.

Gaining wrongfully. Losing wrongfully.

Gaining wrongfully. Losing wrongfully.--A person is said to gain
wrongfully when such person retains wrongfully, as well as when such
person acquires wrongfully. A person is said to lose wrongfully when
such person is wrongfully kept out of any property, as well as when
such person is wrongfully deprived of property.

24.

"Dishonestly".

24. "Dishonestly".--Whoever does anything with the intention of
causing wrongful gain to one person or wrongful loss to another
person, is said to do that thing "dishonestly".

25.

"Fraudulently".

25. "Fraudulently".--A person is said to do a thing fraudulently
if he does that thing with intent to defraud but not otherwise.

1. Ins. by Act 39 of 1920, s. 2.

2. Subs. by Act 40 of 1964, s. 2, for cl. Twelfth, ins. by Act 2 of
1958, s. 2.

3. Ins. by Act 39 of 1920, s. 2.

4. Explanation 4 ins. by Act 2 of 1958, s. 2, omitted by Act 40 of
1964, s. 2.

106


26.

"Reason to believe".

26. “Reason
believe" a thing,
not otherwise.

27.

to believ

said to have "reason to

Property in possession of wife,

27. Property

property is in the possession
that person,

nt of
ng of this Code.

accou
meani

Explanat

withi

1on.--A person
occasion in the capacity of a cl
n the meaning of this section.

in possession

of
Ls

Lt

A person is
if he has sufficient cause to believe that thing but

clerk or servant.

of wife, clerk or servant.-—-When
a person's wife, clerk or servant, on
in that person's possession within the

emp

loyed temporarily
lerk,

or on a particular

or servant, is a clerk or servant

28.
"Counterfeit".

28. "Counterfeit".--A person is said to "counterfeit" who causes
one thing to resemble another thing, intending by means of that
resemblance to practise deception, or knowing it to. be likely that
deception will thereby be practised.

1* [Explanation 1.--It is not essential to counterfeiting that
the imitation should be exact.

Explanation 2.--When a person causeS one thing to resemble
another thing, and the resemblance is such that a person might be
deceived thereby, it shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved,
that the person so causing the one thing to resemble the other thing
intended by means of that resemblance to practise deception or knew it

to be likely that deception would thereby be practised. ]

29.

"Document".


29. "Document".--The word "document" denotes any matter expressed
or described upon any substance by means of letters, figures or marks,
or by more than one of those means, intended to be used, or which may
be used, as evidence of that matter.

Explanation 1.--It is immaterial by what means or upon what
substance the letters, figures or marks are formed, or whether the
evidence is intended for, or may be used in, a Court of Justice, or
not.

Illustrations

A writing expressing the terms of a contract, which may be used

as evidence of the contract, is a document.

A cheque upon a banker is a document.
A power-of-attorney is a document.

A map or plan which is intended to be used or which may be used
as evidence, is a document.

A writing containing directions or instructions is a document.

Explanation 2.--Whatever is expressed by means of letters,
figures or marks as explained by mercantile or other usage, shall be
deemed to be expressed by such letters, figures or marks within the
meaning of this section, although the same may not be actually
expressed.

Illustration

A writes his name on the back of a bill of exchange payable to
his order. The meaning of the endorsement as explained by mercantile
usage, is that the bill is to be paid to the holder. Th ndorsement
is a document, and must be construed in the same manner as if the
words "pay to the holder" or words to that effect had been written
over the signature.

30.

"Valuable security".

30. "Valuable security".--The words "valuable security" denote a
document which is, or purports to be, a document whereby any legal
right is created, extended, transferred, restricted, extinguished or

released, or who hereby any person acknowledges that he lies under
legal liability, or has not a certain legal right.
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 1889, s. 9, for the original Explanation.

107


Illustration

A writes his name on the back of a bi of exchange. As the
effect of this endorsement is to transfer the right to the bill to any
person who may become the lawful holder of it, the endorsement is a
"valuable security".

31.
"A will".
31. "A will".--The words "a will" denote any testamentary
document.
32.
Words referring to acts include illegal omissions.
32. Words referring to acts include illegal omissions.--In every

part of this Code, except where a contrary intention appears from the
context, words which refer to acts done extend also to illegal
omissions.

33.

"Act". "Omission".

33. "Act". "Omission".--The word "act" denotes as well as series
of acts as a single act: the word "omission" denotes as well a series
of omissions as a single omission.

34.

Acts done by several persons in futherance of common intention.

1*[34. Acts done by several persons in futherance of common
intention.--When a criminal act is done by several persons in
furtherance of the common intention of all, each of such persons is

table for that act in th same manner as if it were done by him
alone. ]

35.


When such an act is criminal by reason of its being done with a
criminal knowledge or intention.

35. When such an act is criminal by reason of its being done with
a criminal knowledge or intention.--Whenever an act, which is criminal
only by reason of its being done with a crimina knowledge or
intention, is done by several persons, each of such persons who joins
in the act with such knowledge or intention is liable for the act in
the same manner as if the act were done by him alone with that
knowledge or intention.

36.

Effect caused partly by act and partly by omission.

36. Effect caused partly by act and partly by omission.-—-Wherever
the causing of a certain effect, or an attempt to cause that effect,
by an act or by an omission, is an offence, it is to be understood
that the causing of that effect partly by an act and partly by an
omission is the same offenc

Illustration

A intentionally causes Z's death, partly by illegally omitting to
give Z food, and party by beating Z. A has committed murder.

37.

Co-operation by doing one of several acts constituting an offence.

37. Co-operation by doing one of several acts constituting an
offence.--When an offence is committed by means of several acts,
whoever intentionally co-operates in the commission of that offence by
doing any one of those acts, either singly or jointly with any other
person, commits that offence.

Illustrations

(a) A and B agree to murder Z by severally and at different times
giving him small doses of poison. A and B administer the poison
according to the agreement with intent to murder Z. Z dies from the
effects the several doses of poison so administered to him. Here A and
B intentionally co operate in the commission of murder and as each of
them does an act by which the death is caused, they are both guilty of
the offence though their acts are separate.

(ob) A and B are joint jailors, and as such have the charge of Z,
a prisoner, alternatively for six hours at a time. A and B, intending
to cause Z's death, knowingly co-operate in causing that effect by
illegally omitting, each during the time of his attendance, to furnish



Z with food supplied to them for that purpose. Z dues of hunger. Both
A and B are guilty of the murder of Z.

1. Subs. by Act 27 of 1870, s. 1, for the original section.

108

(c) A, a jailor, has the charge of Z, a prisoner. A, intending to
cause Z's death, illegally omits to supply Z with food; in consequence
of which Z is much reduced in strength, but the starvation is not
sufficient to cause his death. A is dismissed from his office, and B
succeeds him. B, without collusion or co-operation with A, illegally
omits to supply Z with food, knowing that he is likely thereby to
cause Z's death. Z dies of hunger. B is guilty of murder, but, as A
did not co-operate with B.A is guilty only of an attempt to commit
murder.

38.

Persons concerned in criminal Act may be guilty of different
offences.

38. Persons concerned in criminal Act may be guilty of different
offences.--Where several persons are engaged or concerned in the
commission of a criminal act, they may be guilty of different offences
by means of that act.

Illustration

A attacks 2Z under such circumstances of grave provocation that
his killing of Z would be only culpable homicide not amounting to
murder. B, having ill-will towards Z and intending to kill him, and
not having been subject to the provocation, assists A in ki ing Z.

Here, though A and Bare both engaged in causing Z's death, B is
guilty of murder, and A is guilty only of culpable homicide.

39.

"Voluntarily".

39. "Voluntarily".--A person is said to cause an effect
"voluntarily" when he causes it by means whereby he intended to cause
it, or by means which, at the time of employing those means, he knew
or had reason to believe to be likely to cause it.

Illustration

A sets fire, by night, to an inhabited house in a large town, for
the purpose of facilitating a robbery and thus causes the death of a
person. Here, A may not have intended to cause death; and may even be


sorry that death has been caused by his act; yet, if he knew that he
was likely to cause death, he has caused death voluntarily.

40.

"Offence".

1*[40. "Offence".—--Except in the 2*[Chapters] and sections
mentioned in clauses 2 and 3 of this section, the word "offence"
denotes a thing made punishable by this Code.

In Chapter IV, 3*[Chapter VA] and in the following sections,
namely, sections 4*[64, 65, 66, 5*[67], 71], 109, 110, 112, 114, 115,
116, 117, 4187, 194, 195, 203, 211, 213, 214, 221, 222, 223, 224,225,
327, 328, 329, 330, 331, 347, 348, 388, 389 and 445, the word
"offence" denotes a thing punishable under this Code, or under any
special or local law as hereinafter defined.

And in sections 141, 176, 177, 201, 202, 212, 216 and 441, the
word "offence" has the same meaning when the thing punishable under
the special or local law is punishable under such law with
imprisonment for aterm of six months or upwards, whether with or
without fine.]

41.

"Special law".

41. "Special law".--A “special law" is a law applicable toa
particular subject.

42.

"Local law".

42. “Local law".--A "local law" is a law applicable only to a
particular part of 6* [7**** 8*[India]].

1. Subs. by Act 27 of 1870, s. 2, for the original s. 40.
2. Subs. by Act 8 of 1930, s. 2 and Sch. I, for "chapter".
3. Ins. by Act 8 of 1913, s. 2.
4. Ins. by Act 8 of 1882, s. 1.

5. Ins. by Act 10 of 1886, s. 21 (1).


6. Subs. by the A.O. 1948, for "British India".

7. The words "the territories comprised in" were rep. by Act 48 of
1952, s. 3 and Sch. II.

8. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the States".
109

43.

"Illegal".

"Legally bound to do".

43. "Illegal". "Legally bound to do".--The word "illegal" is
applicable to everything which is an offence or which is prohibited by
law, or which furnishes ground for a civil action; and a person is

said to be "legally bound to do" whatever it is illegal in him to
omit.
44,
"Injury".
44. “"Injury".--The word "injury" denotes any harm whatever

illegally caused to any person, in body, mind, reputation or property.

45.

"Life".

45. “Life".--The word "life" denotes the life of a human being,
unless the contrary appears from the context.

46.

"Death".

46. "Death".--The word "death" denotes the death of a human being
unless the contrary appears from the context.

47.


"Animal".

47. “Animal".--The word "animal" denotes any living creature,
other than a human being.

48.

"Vessel".

48. "Vessel".--The word "vessel" denotes anything made for the
conveyance by water of human beings or of property.

49.

"Year".
"Month".
49. "Year". "Month".--Wherever th word "year" or the word

"month" is used, it is to be understood that the year or the month is
to be reckoned according to the British calendar.

50.

"Section".

50. "Section".--The word "section" denotes one of those portions
of a Chapter of this Code which are distinguished by prefixed numeral
figures.

51.

"Oath".

51. “Oath".--The word "oath" includes a solemn affirmation
substituted by law for an oath, and any declaration required or
authorized by law to be made before a public servant or to be used for
the purpose of proof, whether in a Court of Justice or not.

52.


"Good faith".

52. "Good faith".--Nothing is said to be done or believed in
"good faith" which is done or believed without due care and attention.

52A.

"Harbour".

1*[52A. “Harbour".--Except in section 157, and in section 130
in the case in which the harbour is given by the wife or husband of
the person harboured, the word "harbour" includes the supplying a
person with shelter, food, drink, money, clothes, arms, ammunition or
means of conveyance, or the assisting a person by any means, whether
of the same kind as those enumerated in this section or not, to evade
apprehension. ]

CHAPTER III
OF PUNISHMENTS
CHAPTER III
OF PUNISHMENTS
53.
Punishments.
53. Punishments.--The punishments to which offenders are liable
under the provisions of this Code are--—
First.—-—-Death;
2* [Secondly.--Imprisonment for life; ]
3* *x *x *x *x
Fourthly.--Imprisonment, which is of two descriptions,
namely:-—

(1) Rigorous, that is with hard labour;

(2) Simple;

Fifthly.--Forfeiture of property;


Sixthly.--Fine.

1. Ins. by Act 8 of 1942. s. 2.

2. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and _ Sch., for "Secondly.--
Transportation;"(w.e.f. 1-1-1956).

3. "Thirdly,-Penal seritude;" was rep. by Act 17 of 1949, s. 2
(w.e.f. 6-4-1949).

110

53A.

Construction of reference to transportation.

1*[53A. Construction of reference to transportation.-—-(1)
Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) and sub-section (3), any
reference to "transportation for life" in any other law for the time
being in force or in any instrument or order having effect by virtue
of any such law or of any enactment repealed shall be construed as a
reference to "imprisonment for life".

(2) In every case in which a sentence of transportation for a
term has been passed before the commencement of the Code of Criminal
Procedur (Amendment ) Act, 2* [1955], (26 of 1955), the offender
shall be dealt with in th same manner as if sentenced to rigorous
imprisonment for the same term.

(3) Any reference to transportation for a term or to
transportation for any shorter term (by whatever name called) in any
other law for the time being in force shall be deemed to have been
omitted.

(4) Any reference to "transportation" in any other law for the
time being in force shall,-

(a) if the expression means transportation for life, be
construed as a reference to imprisonment for life;

(b) if the expression means transportation for any shorter
term, be deemed to have been omitted. ]

54.

Commutation of sentence of death.

54. Commutation of sentence of death.--In very case in which
sentence of death shall have been passed, 3*[the appropriate
Government] may, without the consent of the offender, commute the


punishment for any other punishment provided by this Code.

55.

Commutation of sentence of imprisonment for life.

55. Commutation of sentence of imprisonment for life.--In every
case in which sentence of 4*[imprisonment] for life shall have been
passed, 5[the appropriate Government] may, without the consent of the
offender, commute the punishment for imprisonment of either
description for a term not exceeding fourteen years.

55A.

Definition of “appropriate Government".

6*[55A. Definition of "appropriate Government".--In sections
fifty-four and fifty-five th xpression "appropriate Government"
means, —

(a) in cases where the sentence is a sentence of death or is
for an offence against any law relating to a matter to which the
xecutive power of the Union extends, the Central Government; and

(b) in cases where the sentence (whether of death or not) is

for an offence against any law relating to a matter to which the

xecutive power of the State extends, the Government of the State
within which the offender is sentenced. ]

56.

56. [Sentence of Europeans and Americans to penal servitude.
Proviso as to sentence for term exceeding ten years but not for life.]
Rep. by the Criminal Law (Removal of Racial Discriminations) Act, 1949
(17 of 1949) (w. e. £. 6-4-1949).

57.

Fractions of terms of punishment.

57. Fractions of terms of punishment.--In calculating fractions
of terms of punishment, 4[imprinsonment] for life shall be reckoned as
equivalent to 4[imprisonment] for twenty years.

58.


58. [Offenders sentenced to transportation how dealt with until
transported.] Rep. by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act,
1955 (26 of 1955), s. 117 and Sch.

1. Ins. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-1-1956).
2. Subs. by Act 36 of 1957, s. 3 and Sch. II, for "1954".
3. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for "the Central Government or the

Provincial Government of the Province within which the offender
shall hav been sentenced".

4. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation"
(w.e.f. 1-1-1956).

5. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for "the provincial Government of the
Province within which the offender shall have been sentenced".

6. Subs., ibid, for s. 55A which had been ins. by the A. O. 1937.
111
59.

59. [Transportation instead of imprisonment.] Rep. by the Code of
Criminal Procedur (Amendment) Act, 1955 (26 of 1955) s.117 and Sch.,

(w.e.f. 1-1-1956).

60.

Sentence may be (in certain cases of imprisonment) wholly or partly
rigorous or simple.

60. Sentence may be (in certain cases of imprisonment) wholly or
partly rigorous or simple.--In every case in which an offender is
punishable with imprisonment which may b of either description, it
shall be competent to the Court which sentences such offender to
direct in the sentence that such imprisonment shall be wholly
rigorous, or that such imprisonment shall be wholly simple or] that
any part of such imprisonment shall be rigorous and the rest simple.

61.

61. [Sentence of forfeiture of property.] Rep. by the Indian
Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 1921 (16 of 1921), s. 4.

62.


62. [Forfeiture of property, in respect of offenders punishable
with death, transportation or imprisonment.] Rep., by s. 4 ibid.

63.

Amount of fine.

63. Amount of fine.--Where no sum is expressed to which a fine
may extend, the amount of fine to which the offender is liable is
unlimited, but shall not be excessive.

64.

Sentence of imprisonment for non-payment of fine.

64. Sentence of imprisonment for non-payment of fine.--1*[In
every case of an offence punishable with imprisonment as well as fine,
in which the offender is sentenced to a fine, whether with or without
imprisonment,

and in every case of an offence punishable 2* [with
imprisonment or fine, or] with fine only, in which the offender is
sentenced to a fine.]

it shall be competent to the Court which sentences such offender
to direct by the sentence that, in default of payment of the fine, the
offender shall suffer imprisonment for a certain term, which
imprisonment shall be in excess of any other imprisonment to which he
may hav been sentenced or to which he may be liable under a
commutation of a sentence.

65.

Limit to imprisonment for non-payment of fine, when imprisonment and
fine awardable.

65. Limit to imprisonment for non-payment of fine, when
imprisonment and fine awardable.--The term for which the Court directs
the offender to be imprisoned in default of payment of a fine shall
not exceed one-fourth of the term of imprisonment which is the maximum
fixed for the offence, if the offence be punishable with imprisonment
as well as fine.

66.


Description of imprisonment for non-payment of fine.

66. Description of imprisonment for non-payment of fine.-—-The
imprisonment which the Court imposes in default of payment of a fine
may be of any description to which the offender might have been
sentenced for the offence.

67.

Imprisonment for non-payment of fine, when offence punishable with
fine only.

67. Imprisonment for non-payment of fine, when offence punishable
with fine only.--If th offenc b punishable with fine only,
3* [the imprisonment which the Court imposes in default of payment of
the fine sha be simple, and] the term for which the Court directs
the offender to be imprisoned, in default of payment of fine, shall
not exceed the following scale, that is to say, for any term not
exceeding two months when the amount of the fine shall not exceed
fifty rupees, and for any term not exceeding four months when the
amount shall not exceed one hundred rupees, and for any term not
exceeding six months in any other case.

68.

Imprisonment to terminate on payment of fine.

68. Imprisonment to terminate on payment of fine.-—-The
imprisonment which is imposed in default of payment of a fine shall
terminate whenever that fine is either paid or levied by process of
law.

1. Subs. by Act 8 of 1882, s. 2, for "in every case in which an
offender is sentenced to a fine".

2. Ins, by Act 10 of 1886, s. 21(2).
3. Ins by Act 8 of 1882, s. 3.

112

69.

Termination of imprisonment on payment of proportional part of fine.

69. Termination of imprisonment on payment of proportional part


of fine.-

that the
less than

A is
months'
rupees of
month of
month has
ime
continu
ifty rup
wo month
wo month
ime of t
continu

mt ct t mh Pc

-If,

in default of payment,
term of
proportional
imprisonment shall terminate.

before the expiration of the term of imprisonment fixed

sentenced to

imprisonment

the
the
exp

of the expiratio
in impri
of the

es
ees
s

s
he
es

of

in

are comp]
expirati

fine be
impriso

ired. If

the i

[e)

impr

Fine levi

able

within si

imprisonment suffered

in default
nment.

n of the first month,
Lsonment.
fine be
mprisonment. A
leted.
n of those two months,
Lsonment,

d

70.
not to
thereof w
years aft
the offen

Fine

ischarge property from

leviable wi

to the part of the

llustration

of one hu
of payment. Here,
levied before th

be discharged as
rupees be paid
or at any
immediate

a fine

paid or
A wi

seventy-fiv

A will be

ndred rupees
if

such a proportion of the fine be paid or
in default of payment
fine still

and
seventy-five
xpiration of one
soon as
or levied at the
later ti
y discharged.

id or vied befor

wi

pa

If fifty rupees be

pa

th

unpaid,

xp

lev

levied
is not
the

to four

the first

while
If

me

iration of
ll be discharged as soon as the
Ld or

ied at the

A will be

x years,
liability.

thin six years, or during

hich
er
der

discharge property
remains unpaid,
the passing
b

liable

years,
the death

of th

property which

debts.

71.

then at any time previous to the exp
offender does

or during imprisonment.

whil

or at any later tim
immediately discharged.

imprisonment.

from liability.--The f

may be levied at

ine,

or

any time within si

Death not to

Death
any part
x

of the sentence, and if, und
to imprisonment fora

irat

ion of t

would,

after

his death, be legally 1

not discharge from the ]

r th

hat

sentence,

longer period than six
period;
tabi

and
ity any

iab

Limit of punishment of offence made up of several offences.

71.

sim

Where anything

parts is

itse

which is

f an off

the punis
expressly

1* [W

offences

hment
prov

of more

ided.

here anything
separate defini

tions of

ar

where several acts,

it of punishment of offence made up of several

an offence is made up of part
nce, th
than one of such his offences,

is an offence fa within

any

lling

or

of which one or more than one

Ss,

for his

offences.——
any of which
offender shall not be punished with

unless it be so

two
law in force for the time being by which
defined or punished,

or more

would by itself


or themselves constitute an offence, constitute, when combined, a
different offence,

the offender shall not be punished with a more severe punishment
than the Court which tries him could award for any one of such
offences].

Illustrations

(a) A gives Z fifty strokes with a stick. Here A may have
committed th offence of voluntarily causing hurt to Z by the whole
beating, and also by each of the blows which make up the whole
beating. If A were liable to punishment for every blow, he might be
imprisoned for fifty years, one for each blow. But he is liable only
to one punishment for the whole beating.

(b) But, if, while A is beating 2Z, Y interferes, and A
intentionally strikes Y, here, as the blow given to Y is no part of
the act whereby A voluntarily causes hurt to Z, A is liable to one
punishment for voluntarily causing hurt to Z, and to another for the
blow given to Y.

72.

Punishment of person guilty of one of several offences, the judgment
stating that it is doubtful of which.

72. Punishment of person guilty of one of several offences, the
judgment stating that it is doubtful of which.--In all cases in which
judgment is given that a person is guilty of one of several offences
specified in the judgment, but that it is doubtful of which of these
offences he is guilty, the offender sha be punished for the offence
for which the lowest punishment is provided if the same punishment is
not provided for a

1. Ins by Act 8 of 1882, s, 4.

113

73.

Solitary confinement.

73. Solitary confinement.--Whenever any person is convicted of an
offence for which under this Code the Court has power to sentence him
to rigorous imprisonment, the Court may, by its sentence, order that
the offender shall be kept in solitary confinement for any portion or
portions of the imprisonment to which he is sentenced, not exceeding
three months in the whole, according to the following scale, that is
to say--



a time not exceeding one month if the term of imprisonment sha
not exceed six months:

a time not exceeding two months if the term of imprisonment sha
exceed six months and 1*[shall not exceed one] year:

a time not exceeding three months if the term of imprisonment
shall exceed one year.

74.

Limit of solitary confinement.

74. Limit of solitary confinement.--In executing a sentence of
solitary confinement, such confinement shall in no case exceed
fourteen days at a time, with intervals between th periods of
solitary confinement of not less duration than such periods; and when
the imprisonment awarded shall exceed three months, the solitary
confinement shall not exceed seven days in any one month of the whole
imprisonment awarded, with intervals between th periods of solitary
confinement of not less duration than such periods.

75.

Enhanced punishment for certain offence under Chapter XII or Chapter
XVII after previous conviction.

2*[75. Enhanced punishment for certain offences under Chapter
XII or Chapter XVII after previous conviction.-——-Whoever, having been
convicted, —

(a) by a Court in 3*[India], of an offence punishable
under Chapter XII or Chapter XVII of this Code with imprisonment
of either description for a term of three years or upwards, 4****

4x * * * *

shall be guilty of any offence punishabl under ither of those
Chapters with like imprisonment for the like term, shall be subject
for every such subsequent offence to 5* [imprisonment for life] or
to imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
ten years.]

CHAPTER IV

GENERAL EXCEPTIONS



CHAPTER IV

GENERAL EXCEPTIONS

76.

Act done by a person bound, or by mistake of fact believing himself
bound, by law.--

76. Act done by a person bound, or by mistake of fact believing
himself bound, by law.--Nothing is an offence which is done by a
person who is, or who by reason of a mistake of fact and not by reason
of a mistake of law in good faith believes himself to be, bound by law
to do it.

Illustrations

(a) A, a soldier, fires on amob by the order of his superior
officer, in conformity with the commands of the law. A has committed
no offence.

(b) A, an officer of a Court of Justice, being ordered by that
Court to arrest Y, and after due enquiry, believing Z to be Y, arrests
Z. A has committed no offence.

77.

Act of Judge when acting judicially.

77. Act of Judge when acting judicially.--Nothing is an offence
which is done by a Judge when acting judicially in the exercise of any
power which is, or which in good faith he believes to be, given to him
by law.

1. Subs. by Act 8 of 1882, s. 5, for "be less than a".

2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1910, s. 2, for the original section.

3. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the States".

4, The word "or" at the end of cl. (a) and cl. (b) were omitted by

s. 3 and Sch., ibid.

5. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for
life" (w.e.f. 1-1-1956).

114

78.


Act done pursuant to the judgment or order of Court.

78. Act done pursuant to the judgment or order of Court.--Nothing
which is done in pursuance of, or which is warranted by the judgment
or order of, a Court of Justice, if done whilst such judgment or order
remains in force, is an offence, notwithstanding the Court may have
had no jurisdiction to pass such judgment or order, provided the
person doing the act in good faith believes that the Court had such
jurisdiction.

719.

Act done by a person justified, or by mistake of fact believing
himself, justified, by law.

79. Act done by a person justified, or by mistake of fact
believing himself, justified, by law.--Nothing is an offence which is
done by any person who is justified by law, or who by reason of a
mistake of fact and not by reason of a mistake of law in good faith,
believes himself to be justified by law, in doing it.

Illustration

A sees Z commit what appears to A to be amurder. A, in the
exercise, to the best of his judgment exerted in good faith, of the
power which the law gives to all persons of apprehending murderers in
the fact, seizes Z, in order to bring Z before the proper authorities.
A has committed no offence, though it may turn out that Z was acting
in self-defence.

80.

Accident in doing a lawful act.

80. Accident in doing a lawful act.--Nothing is an offence which
is done by accident or misfortune, and without any criminal intention
or knowledge in the doing of a lawful act in a lawful manner by lawful

means and with proper care and caution.

Illustration
A is at work with a hatchet; the head flies off and kills a man

who is standing by. Here, if there was no want of proper caution on
the part of A, his act is excusable and not an offence.

81.


Act likely to cause harm, but done without criminal intent, and to
prevent other harm.

81. Act likely to cause harm, but done without criminal intent,
and to prevent other harm.--Nothing is an offence merely by reason of
its being done with the knowledge that it is likely to cause harm, if
it be done without any criminal intention to cause harm, and in good
faith for the purpose of preventing or avoiding other harm to person
or property.

Explanation.-It is a question of fact in such a case whether th
harm to be prevented or avoided was of such a nature and so imminent
as to justify or excuse the risk of doing the act with the knowledge
that it was likely to cause harm.

Illustrations

(a) A, the captain of a steam vessel, suddenly and without any
fault or negligence on his part, finds himself in such a position
that, before he can stop his vessel, he must inevitably run down a
boat B, with twenty or thirty passengers on board, unless he changes
the course of his vessel, and that, by changing his course, he must

incur risk of running down a boat C with only two passengers on board,
which he may possibly clear. Here, if A alters his course without any
intention to run down the boat C and in good faith for the purpose of
avoiding the danger to the passengers in the boat B, he is not guilty
of an offence, though he may run down the boat C by doing an which he
knew was likely to cause that effect, if it be found as a matter of
fact that the danger which he intended to avoid was such as to excuse
him in incurring the risk of running down C.

(b) A, in a great fire, pulls down houses in order to prevent the
conflagration from spreading. He does this with the intention in good
faith of saving human life or property. Here, if it be found that the
harm to be prevented was of such a nature and so imminent as to excuse
A's act, A is not guilty of the offence.

115

82.

Act of a child under seven years of age.

82. Act of a child under seven years of age.--Nothing is an
offence which is done by a child under seven years of age.

83.

Act of a child above seven and under twelve of immature
understanding.


83. Act of a child above seven and under twelve of immature
understanding.--Nothing is an offence which is done by a child above
seven years of age and under twelve, who has not attained sufficient
maturity of understanding to judge of the nature and consequences of
his conduct on that occasion.

84.

Act of a person of unsound mind.

84. Act of a person of unsound mind.--Nothing is an offence which
is done by a person who, at the time of doing it, by reason of
unsoundness of mind, is incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or
that he is doing what is either wrong or contrary to law.

85.

Act of a person incapable of judgment by reason of intoxication caused
against his will.

85. Act of a person incapable of judgment by reason of
intoxication caused against his will.--Nothing is an offence which is
done by a person who, at the time of doing it, is, by reason of
intoxication, incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that he
1s doing what is either wrong, or contrary to law: provided that the
thing which intoxicated him was administered to him without his
knowledge or against his will.

86.

Offence requiring a particular intent or knowledge committed by one
who is intoxicated.

86. Offence requiring a particular intent or knowledge committed
by one who is intoxicated.--In cases where an act done is not an
offence unless done with a particular knowledge or intent, a person
who does the act ina state of intoxication shall be liable to be
dealt with as if he had the same knowledge as he would have had if he
had not been intoxicated, unless the thing which intoxicated him was
administered to him without his knowledge or against his will.

87.

Act not intended and not known to be likely to cause death or grievous


hurt, done by consent.

87. Act not intended and not known to be likely to cause death or
grievous hurt, done by consent.--Nothing which is not intended to
cause death, or grievous hurt, and which is not known by the doer to
be likely to cause death or grievous hurt, is an offence by reason of
any harm which it may cause, or be intended by the doer to cause, to
any person, abov ighteen years of age, who has given consent,
whether express or implied, to suffer that harm; or by reason of any
harm which it may be known by the doer to be likely to cause to any
such person who has consented to take the risk of that harm.

Illustration

A and Z agree to fence with each other for amusement. This
agreement implies the consent of each to suffer any harm which, in the
course of such fencing, may be caused without foul play; and if A,
while playing fairly, hurts Z, A commits no offence.

88.

Act not intended to cause death, done by consent in good faith for
person's benefit.

88. Act not intended to cause death, done by consent in good
faith for person's benefit.--Nothing, which is not intented to cause
death, is an offence by reason of any harm which it may cause, or be
intended by the doer to cause, or be known by the doer to be likely to
cause, to any person for whose benefit it is done in good faith, and
who has given a consent, whether express or implied to suffer that
harm, or to take the risk of that harm.

Tllustration
A, a surgeon, knowing that a particular operation is likely to
cause the death of Z, who suffers under the painful complaint, but not
intending to cause Z's death, and intending, in good faith, Z's
benefit, performs that operation on 2Z, with Z's consent. A _ has

committed no offence.

89.

Act done in good faith for benefit of child or insane person, by or by
consent of guardian.

89. Act done in good faith for benefit of child or insane person,
by or by consent of guardian.--Nothing which is done in good faith for
the benefit of a person under twelve years of age, or of unsound mind,
by or by consent, either express or implied, of the guardian or other
person having lawful charge of that person, is an offence by reason of



any harm which it may cause, or be intended by the doer to cause or be
known by the doer to be likely to cause to that person: Provided-

116

Provisos.

Provisos.-First.-That this exception shall not extend to the
intentional causing of death, or to the attempting to cause
death;

Secondly.-That this exception shall not extend to the doing
of anything which the person doing it knows to be likely to cause
death, for any purpose other than the preventing of death or
grievous hurt, or the curing of any grievous disease or
infirmity;

Thirdly.-That this exception shall not extend to the
voluntary causing of grievous hurt, or to the attempting to cause
grievous hurt, unless it be for the purpose of preventing death
or grievous hurt, or the curing of any grievous disease or
infirmity;

Fourthly.-That this exception shall not extend to the
abetment of any offence, to the committing of which offence it
would not extend.

Illustration

A, in good faith, for his child's benefit without his child's
consent, has his child cut for the stone by a surgeon knowing it to be
likely that the operation will cause the child's death, but = not
intending to cause the child's death. A is within the exception, in as
much as his object was the cure of the child.

90.

Consent known to be given under fear or misconception.

90. Consent known to be given under fear or misconception.--A
consent is not such a consent as is intended by any section of this
Code, if the consent is given by a person under fear of injury, or
under a misconception of fact, and if the person doing the act knows,

or has reason to believe, that the consent was given in consequence of
such fear or misconception; or

Consent of insane person.

Consent of insane person.-if the consent is given by a person
who, from unsoundness of mind, or intoxication, is unable to
understand the nature and consequence of that to which he gives his



consent; or

Consent of child.

Consent of child.-unless the contrary appears from the context, if
the consent is given by a person who is under twelve years of age.

91.

Exclusion of acts which are offences independently of harm cause.

91. Exclusion of acts which ar offences independently of harm
cause.--The exceptions in sections 87, 88 and 89 do not extend to acts
which ar offences independently of any harm which they may cause, or

be intended to cause, or be known to be likely to cause, to the person
giving the consent, or on whose behalf the consent is given.

Illustration

Causing miscarriage (unless caused in good faith for the purpose
of saving the life of the woman) is offence inexpediently of any harm
which it may cause or be intended to cause to the woman. Therefore, it
is not an offence "by reason of such harm"; and the consent of the
woman or of her guardian to the causing of such miscarriage does not
justify the act.

92.
Act done in good faith for benefit of a person without consent.

92. Act done in good faith for benefit of a person without
consent.-Nothing is an offence by reason of any harm which it may
causes to a person for whose benefit it is done in good faith, even
without that person's consent, if the circumstances are such that it
is impossible for that person to signify consent, or if that person is
incapable of giving consent, and has no guardian or other person in
lawful charge of him from whom it is possible to obtain consent in
time for the thing to be done with benefit: Provided-

Provisos.

117

Provisos.-First.-That this exception shall not extend to the
intentional causing of death or the attempting to cause death;



finds
in go
his p

to be
and i

Secondly.-That this exception shall not extend to the doing
of anything which the person doing it knows to be likely to cause
death, for any purpose other than the preventing of death or
grievous hurt, or the curing of any grievous disease or
infirmity;

Thirdly.-That this exception shall not extend to the
voluntary causing of hurt, or to the attempting to cause hurt,
for any purpose other than the preventing of death or hurt;

Fourthly.-That this exception shall not extend to the
abetment of any offence, to the committing of which offence it
would not extend.

Illustrations

(a) 2 is thrown from his horse, and is insensible. A, a surgeon,
that Z requires to be trepanned. A, not intending Z's death, but
od faith, for Z's benefit, performs the trepan before Z recovers
ower of judging for himself. A has committed no offence.

(b) Z is carried off by a tiger. A fires at the tiger knowing it
likely that the shot may kill Z, but not intending to kill 2Z,
n good faith intending Z's benefit. A's ball gives Z a mortal

wound. A has committed no offence.

to pr
not t
spite

child's benefit. A has committed no offence.

(c) A, a surgeon, sees a child suffer an accident which is likely
ove fatal unless an operation be immediately performed. There is
ime to apply to the child's guardian. A performs the operation in

of the entreaties of the child, intending, in good faith, the

(d) A is in a house which is on fire, with Z, a child. People

below hold out a blanket. A drops the child, from the house-top,

knowi

ng it to be likely that the fall may kill the child, but not

inten
benef
commi

meani

93.

Commu

good
it is

ding to kill the child, and intending, in good faith, the child's
it. Here, even if the child is killed by the fall, A _ has
tted no offence.

Explanation.—-Mere pecuniary benefit is not benefit within the
ng of sections 88 89 and 92.

nication made in good faith.

93. Communication made in good faith.--No communication made in
faith is an offence by reason of any harm to the person to whom
made, if it is made for the benefit of that person.

Illustration

A, a surgeon, in good faith, communicates to a patient his


opinion that he cannot live. The patient dies in consequence of t

shock. A has committed no offence,

the communication might cause the patient's death.

94.

Act to which a person is compelled by threats.

94. Act to which a person is compelled by threats.-—-Exce
murder, and offences against the State punishable with death, nothi

is an offence which is done

by a person who is compelled to do it

threats, which, at the time of doing it, reasonnably cause t
apprehension that instant death to that person will otherwise b t

consequence: Provided the

he

though he knew it to be likely that

pt
ng
by
ne

person doing the act did not of his o

accord, or from a reasonable apprehension of harm to himself short
instant death, place himself in the situation by which he _ beca

subject to such constraint.

Explanation 1.-A person

who, of his own accord, or by reason of

threat of being beaten, joins a gang of dacoits, knowing the

character, is not entitled

to the benefit of this exception, on t

ground of his having been compelled by his associates to do anythi

that is an offence by law.

118

Explantion 2.-A person
by threat of instant death,

seized by a gang of dacoits, and force
to do a thing which is an offence by la

h
wn
of
me

a
ir
he
ng

d,

WwW;

for example, a smith compelled to take his tools and to force the door
of a house for the dacoits to enter and plunder it, is entitled to t

benefit of this exception.

95.

Act causing slight harm.

95. Act causing slight
that it causes, or that it
to be likely to cause, any
person of ordinary sense and

harm.--Nothing is an offence by reas
is intended to cause, or that it is kno
harm, if that harm is so slight that
temper would complain of such harm.

Of the Right of Private Defence

96.

Things done in private defence.

he

on
wn
no


96. Things done in private defence.--Nothing is an offence which
is done in the exercise of the right of private defence.

97.

Right of private defence of the body and of property.

97. Right of private defence of the body and of property.-——Every
person has aright, subject to the restrictions contained in section
99, to defend-

First.--His own body, and the body of any other person,
against any offence affecting the human body;

Secondly.--The property, whether movable or immovable, of
himself or of any other person, against any act which is an
offence falling under the defintion of theft, robbery, mischief
or crimina trespass, or which is an attempt to commit theft,
robbery, mischief or criminal trespass.

98.

Right of private defence against the act of a person of unsound mind,
etc.

98. Right of private defence against the act of a person of
unsound mind, etc.--When an act which would otherwis be a certain
offence, is not that offence, by reason of the youth, the want of
maturity of understanding, the unsoundness of mind or the intoxication
of the person doing that act, or by reason of any misconception on the
part of that person, every person has the same right of private
defence against that act which he would have if the act were that
offence.

Illustrations

(a) Z, under the influence of madness, attempts to kill A; Z is
guilty of no offence. But A has the same right of private defence
which he would have if Z were sane.

(b) A enters by night a house which he is legally entitled to
enter. Z, in good faith, taking A for a house-breaker, attacks A. Here
Z, by attacking A under this misconception, commits no offence. But A
has the same right of private defence against Z, which he would have
if Z were not acting under that misconception.

99.

Acts against which there is no right of private defence.


99. Acts against which there is no right of private defence.--
There is no right of private defence against an act which does not
reasonably caus the apprehension of death or of grievous hurt, if
done, or attempted to be done, by a public servant acting in good
faith under colour of his office, though that act may not be strictly
justifiable by law.

There is no right of private defence against an act which does
not reasonably cause the apprehension of death or of grievous hurt, if
done, or attempted to be done, by the direction of a public servant
acting in good faith under colour of his office though that direction
may not be strictly justifiable by law.

There is no right of private defence in cases in which there is
time to have recourse to protection of the public authorities.

Extent to which the right may be exercised.

Extent to which the right may b xercised.-—-The right of private
defence in no case extends to the inflicting of more harm than it is
necessary to inflict for the purpose of defence.

119

Explanation 1.-A person is not deprived of the right of private
defence against an act done, or attempted to’ be done, by a public
servant, as such, unless’ he knows or has reason to believe, that the
person doing the act is such public servant.

Explanation 2.-A person is not deprived of the right of private
defence against an act done, or attempted to be done, by the direction
of a public servant, unless he knows, or has reason to believe, that
the person doing the act is acting by such direction, or unless such
person states the authority under which he acts, or if he has
authority in writing, unless he produces such authority, if demanded.

100.

When the right of private defence of the body extends to causing
death.

100. When the right of private defence of the body extends to
causing death.--The right of private defence of the body extends,
under the restrictions mentioned in the last preceding section, to the
voluntary causing of death or of any other harm to the assailant, if
the offence which occasions the exercise of the right be of any of the
descriptions hereinafter enumerated, namely:-

First.-Such an assault as may reasonably cause the


apprehension that death will otherwise be the consequence of such
assault;

Secondly.-Such an assault as may reasonably cause the
apprehension that grievous hurt will otherwise be the consequenc
of such assault;

Thirdly.-An assault with the intention of committing rape;

Fourthly.-An assault with the intention of gratifying
unnatural lust;

Fifthly.-An assault with the intention of kidnapping or
abducting;

Sixthly.-An assault with the intention of wrongfully
confining a person, under circumstances which may reasonably
cause him to apprehend that he will be unable to have recourse to
the public authorities for his release.

101.

When such right extends to causing any harm other than death.

101. When such right extends to causing any harm other than
death.--If the offence be not of any of the descriptions enumerated in
the last preceding section, the right of private defence of the body
does not extend to the voluntary causing of death to the assailant,
but does extend, under the restrictions mentioned in section 99, to
the voluntary causing to the assailant of any harm other than death.

102.

Commencement and continuance of the right of private defence of the
body.

102. Commencement and continuance of the right of private defence
of the body.--The right of private defence of the body commences as
soon aS a reasonable apprehension of danger to the body arises from an
attempt or threat to commit the offence though the offence may not
have been committed; and it continues as long as such apprehension of
danger to the body continues.

103.

When the right of private defence of property extends to causing
death.


103. When the right of private defence of property extends to
causing death.--The right of private defence of property extends,
under the restrictions mentioned in section 99, to the voluntary
causing of death or of any other harm to the wrong-doer, if the
offence, the committing of which, or the attempting to commit which,
occasions the exercise of the right, be an offence of any of the
descriptions hereinafter enumerated, namely:-

First.—-Robbery;
Secondly.—-House-breaking by night;
Thirdly.-Mischief by fire committed on any building, tent or

vessel, which building, tent or vessel is used as a human
dwelling, or as a place for the custody of property;

Fourthly.-Theft, mischief, or house-trespass, under such
circumstances as may reasonably cause apprehension that death or
grievous hurt will b the consequence, if such right of private

defence is not exercised.

120

104.

When such right to causing any harm other than death.

104. When such right to causing any harm other than death.--If
the offence, the committing of which, or the attempting to commit
which occasions the exercise of the right of privat defence, b
theft, mischief, or criminal trespass, not of any of the descriptions
enumerated in the last preceding section, that right does not extend
to the voluntary causing of death, but does extend, subject to the
restrictions mentioned in section 99, to the voluntary causing to the
wrong-doer of any harm other than death.

105.

Commencement and continuance of the right of private defence of
property.

105. Commencement and continuance of the right of private defence
of property.--The right of private defence of property commences when
a reasonable apprehension of danger to the property commences.

The right of private defence of property against theft continues
till the offender has effected his retreat with the property or either
the assistance of the public authorities is obtained, or the property
has been recovered.

The right of private defence of property against robbery


continues as long as’ the offender causes or attempts to cause to any
person death or hurt or wrongful restraint or as long as the fear of
instant death or of instant hurt or of instant personal restraint
continues.

The right of private defence of property against criminal
trespass or mischief continues as long as the offender continues in
the commission of criminal trespass or mischief.

The right of private defence of property against house-breaking
by night continues as long as the house-trespass which has been begun
by such house-breaking continues.

106.

Right of private defence against deadly assault when there is risk of
harm to innocent person.

106. Right of private defence against deadly assault when there
is risk of harm to innocent person.--If in the exercise of the right
of private defence against an assault which reasonably causes’ the
apprehension of death, th defender b so situated that he cannot
effectually exercise that right without risk of harm to an innocent
person, his right of private defenc xtends to the running of that
risk.

Illustration

A is attacked by amob who attempt to murder him. He cannot
effectually exercise his right of private defence without firing on
the mob, and he cannot fire without risk of harming young children who
are mingled with the mob. A commits no offence if by so firing he
harms any of the children.

CHAPTER V

OF ABETMENT

CHAPT!

eal
v9)
<

OF ABETMENT

107.

Abetment of a thing.

107. Abetment of a thing.--A person abets the doing of a thing,
who-


First.-Instigates any person to do that thing; or

Secondly.-Engages with one or more other person or persons
in any conspiracy for the doing of that thing, if an act or
tllegal omission takes place in pursuance of that conspiracy, and
in order to the doing of that thing; or

Thirdly.-Intentionally aids, by any act or illegal omission,
the doing of that thing.

Explanation 1.-A person who, by wilful misrepresentation, or by
wilful concealment of a material fact which he is bound to disclose,
voluntarily causes or procures, or attempts to cause or procure, a
thing to be done, is said to instigate the doing of that thing.

Illustration

A, a public officer, is authorized by a warrant from a Court of
Justice to apprehend Z, B, knowing that fact and also that C is not Z,
wilfully represents to A that C is Z, and thereby intentionally causes
A to apprehend C. Here B abets by instigation the apprehension of C.

121

Explanation 2.-—-Whoever, ither prior to or at the time of the
commission of an act, does anything in order to facilitate the
commission of that act, and thereby facilitates the commission
thereof, is said to aid the doing of that act.

108.

Abettor.

108. Abettor.--A person abets an offence, who abets either th
commission of an offence, or the commission of an act which would be
an offence, if committed by a person capable by law of committing an
offence with the same intention or knowledge as that of the abettor.

Explanation 1.-The abetment of the illegal omission of an act may
amount to an offence although the abettor may not himself be bound to
do that act.

Explanation 2.-To constitute th offence of abetment it is not
necessary that the act abetted should be committed, or that the effect
requisite to constitute the offence should be caused.

Illustrations

(a) A instigates B to murder C. B refuses to do so. A is guilty
of abetting B to commit murder.

(b) A instigates B to murder D. B in pursuance of the instigation


stabs D. D recovers from the wound. A is guilty of instigating B to
commit murder.

Explanation 3.-It is not necessary that the person abetted should
be capable by law of committing an offence, or that he should have the
same guilty intention or knowledge as that of the abettor, or any
guilty intention or knowledge.

Illustrations

(a) A, with a guilty intention, abets a child or a lunatic to
commit an act which would be an offence, if committed by a person
capable by law of committing an offence, and having the same intention
as A. Here A, whether the act be committed or not, is guilty of
abetting an offence.

(bob) A, with the intention of murdering Z, instigates B, a child
under seven years of age, to do an act which causes Z's death. B, in
consequence of the abetment, does the act in the absence of A and
thereby causes Z's death. Here, though B was not capable by law of

committing an offence, A is liable to be punished in the same manner
as if B had been capable by law of committing an offence, and had
committed murder, and he is therefore subject to the punishment of
death.

(c) A instigates B to set fire to a dwelling-house. B, in
consequence of the unsoundness of his mind, being incapable of knowing
the nature of the act, or that he is doing what is wrong or contrary
to law, sets fire to the house in consequence of A's instigation. B
has committed no offence, but A is guilty of abetting the offence of
setting fire to a dwelling-house, and is liable to the punishment
provided for that offence.

(d) A, intending to cause a theft to be committed, instigates B
to take property belonging to Z out of Z's possession. A induces B to
believe that the property belongs to A. B takes the property out of
Z's possession, in good faith, believing it to be A's property. B,
acting under this misconception, does not take dishonestly, and
therefore does not commit theft. But A is guilty of abetting theft,

and is liable to the same punishment as if B had committed theft.

Explanation 4.-The abetment of an offence being an offence, the
abetment of such an abetment is also an offence.

Illustration

A instigates B to instigate C to murder Z. B= accordingly
instigates C to murder Z, and C commits that offence in consequence of
B's instigation. B is liable to be punished for his offence with the
punishment for murder; and, as A instigated B to commit the offence, A
is also liable to the same punishment.

122

Explanation 5.-It is not necessary to the commission of the
offence of abetment by conspiracy that the abettor should concert the


offence with the person who commits it. It is sufficient if he engages
in the conspiracy in pursuance of which the offence is committed.

Illustration

A concerts with B a plan for poisoning Z. It is agreed that A

sha administer the poison. B then explains the plan to C mentioning
that a third person is to administer the poison, but without
mentioning A's name. C agrees to procure the poison, and procures and

delivers it to B for the purpose of its being used in the manner
explained. A administers the poison; Z dies in consequence. Here,
though A and C have not conspired together, yet C has been engaged in
the conspiracy in pursuance of which Z has been murdered. C has
therefore committed the offence defined in this section and is liable
to the punishment for murder.

108A.

Abetment in India of offences outside India.

1*[108A. Abetment in India of offences outside India.--A person
abets an offence within the meaning of this Code who, in 2*[India],
abets the commission of any act without and beyond 2* [India] which
would constitute an offence if committed in 2*[India].

Illustration

A, in 2*[India], instigates B, a foreigner in Goa, to commit a
murder in Goa, A is guilty of abetting murder. |]

109.

Punishment of abetment if the act abetted is committed in consequence
and where no express provision is made for its punishment.

109. Punishment of abetment if the act abetted is committed in
consequence and where no express provision is made for its
punishment.-——-Whoever abets any offence shall, if the act abetted is
committed in consequence of the abetment, and no express provision is
made by this Code for the punishment of such abetment, be punished
with the punishment provided for the offence.

Explanation.-An act or offence is said to be committed in
consequence of abetment, when it is committed in consequence of the
instigation, or in pursuance of the conspiracy, or with the aid which
constitutes the abetment.

Illustrations

(a) A offers a bribe to B, a public servant, as a reward for
showing A some favour in the exercise of B's official functions. B



accepts the bribe. A has abetted the offence defined in section 161.

(ob) A instigates B to give fals vidence. B, in consequence of
the instigation, commits that offence. A is guilty of abetting that
offence, and is liable to the same punishment as B.

(c) A and B conspire to poison Z. A, in pursuance of the
conspiracy, procures the poison and delivers it to B in order that he
may administer it to Z. B, in pursuance of the conspiracy, administers
the poison to Z in A's absence and thereby causes Z's death. Here B is
guilty of murder. A is guilty of abetting that offence by conspiracy,
and is liable to the punishment for murder.

110.

Punishment of abetment if person abetted does act with different
intention from that of abettor.

110. Punishment of abetment if person abetted does act with
different intention from that of abettor.—--Whoever abets the
commission of an offence shall, if the person abetted does the act
with a different intention or knowledge from that of the abettor, be
punished with the punishment provided for the offence which would have
been committed if the act had been done with the intention or
knowledge of the abettor and with no other.

1. Added by Act 4 of 1898, s. 3.

2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s, 3 and Sch., for "the States".
123

111.

Liability of abettor when one act abetted and different act done.

111. Liability of abettor when one act abetted and different act
done.--When an Act is abetted and a different act is done, the abettor
is liable for the act done, in the same manner and to the same extent
as if he had directly abetted it:

Proviso.

Proviso.--Provided the act done was a probable consequence of the
abetment, and was committed under the influence of the instigation, or
with the aid or in pursuance of the conspiracy which constituted the
abetment.

Illustrations


(a) A instigates a child to put poison into the food of Z, and
gives him poison for that purpose. The child, in consequence of the
instigation, by mistake puts the poison into the food of Y, which is
by the side of that of 2Z. Here if the child was acting under the
influence of A's instigation, and the act done was under the
circumstances a probable consequenc of the abetment, A is liable in
the same manner and to the same extent as if he had instigated the
child to put the poison into the food of Y.

(ob) A instigates B to burn Z's house. B sets fire to the house
and at the same time commits theft of property there. A, though guilty
of abetting the burning of the house, is not guilty of abetting the
theft; for the theft was a distinct act, and not a= probable
consequence of the burning.

(c) A instigates B and C to break into an inhabited house at
midnight for the purpose of robbery, and provides them with arms for
that purpose. B and C break into the house, and being resisted by Z,
one of the inmates, murder Z. Here, if that murder was the probable
consequence of the abetment, A is liable to the punishment provided
for murder.

112.

Abettor when liable to cumulative punishment for act abetted and for
act done.

112. Abettor when liable to cumulative punishment for act abetted
and for act done.--If the act for which the abettor is liable under
the last preceding section is committed in addition to the act
abetted, and constitute a distinct offence, the abettor is liable to

punishment for each of the offences.
Illustration

A instigates Bto resist by force a distress made by a public
servant. B, in consequence resists that distress. In offering the
resistance, B voluntarily causes grievous hurt to the officer
executing the distress. As B has committed both the offence of
resisting the distress, and the offence of voluntarily causing
grievous hurt, B is liable to punishment for both these offences; and,
if A knew that B was ikely voluntarily to cause grievous hurt in
resisting the distress A will also be liable to punishment for each of
the offences.

113.

Liability of abettor for an effect caused by the act abetted different
from that intended by the abettor.


113.
different from

Liability of abettor for an effect caused by the act abetted
that intended by the abettor.--When an act is abetted

with the intention on the part of the abettor of causing a particular
effect, and an act for which the abettor is liable in consequence of
the abetment, causes a different effect from that intended by the
abettor, the abettor is table for the effect caused, in the same
manner and to the same extent as if he had abetted the act with the
intention of causing that effect, provided he knew that the act
abetted was likely to cause that effect.
Tllustration
A instigates B to cause grievous hurt to Z. B, in consequence of

the instigation, causes grievous hurt to Z. Z dies in consequence.

Here, if A knew that the grievous hurt abetted was likely to cause
death, A is liable to be punished with the punishment provided for
murder.

114.

is committed.

Abettor present when offenc

114. Abettor present when offence is committed.--Whenever any

person who

if absent would be liable to be punished as an abettor,

is

present when the act

consequence of the abetment

or offence

for which he woul
is committed, he shall

ld be punishable in
l be deemed to have

committed such act or offence.

124

115.

Abetment of offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life-if
offence is not committed.

115. Abetment of offence punishable with death or imprisonment
for life--if offence not committed.-Whoever abets the commission of an
offence punishable with death or 1*[imprisonment for life], shall,
if that offence be not committed in consequence of the abetment, and
no express provision is made by this Code for the punishment of such
abetment, punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to
fine:

be

if act causing harm be done in consequence.

if act
which the
causes hurt

causing harm be done in consequence.--and if any act for
abettor is liable in consequence of the abetment, and which
to any person, is done, the abettor shall be liable to



imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
fourteen years, and shall also be liable to fine.

Illustration

A instigates B to murder Z. The offence is not committed. If B
had murdered 2Z, he would have been subject to the punishment of death
or 1*[imprisonment for life]. Therefor A is iable to imprisonment
for a term which may extend to seven years and also to a fine; and, if
any hurt be done to Z in consequence of th abetment, h will be
liable to imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years,
and to fine.

116.

Abetment of offence punishable with imprisonment--if offence be not
committed.

116. Abetment of offence punishable with imprisonment-—-if
offence be not committed.--Whoever abets an offence punishable with
imprisonment shall, if that offence be not committed in consequence of
the abetment, and no express provision is made by this Code for the
punishment of such abetment, be punished with imprisonment of any
description provided for that offence for a term which may extend to
one-fourth part of the longest term provided for that offence; or with
such fine as is provided for that offence, or with both;

if abettor or person abetted be a public servant whose duty it is to
prevent offence.

if abettor or person abetted be a public servant whose duty it is

to prevent offence.--and if the abettor or the person abetted is a
public servant, whose duty it is to prevent the commission of such
offence, th abettor shall be punished with imprisonment of any

description provided for that offence, for a term which may extend to
one-half of the longest term provided for that offence, or with such
fine as is provided for the offence, or with both.

Illustrations

(a) A offers a bribe to B, a public servant, as a reward for
showing. A some favour in the exercise of B's official functions. B
refuses to accept the bribe. A is punishable under this section.

(b) A instigates B to give fals vidence. Here, if B does not
give fals vidence, A has nevertheless committed the offence defined
in this section, and is punishable accordingly.

(c) A, a police-officer, whose duty it is to prevent robbery,
abets the commission of robbery. Here, though the robbery be not
committed, A is liable to one-half of the longest term of imprisonment
provided for that offence, and also to fine.



(d) B abets the commission of a robbery by A, a police-officer,
whose duty it is to prevent that offence. Here though the robbery be
not committed, Bis liable to one-half of the longest term of
imprisonment provided for the offence of robbery, and also to fine.

117.

Abetting commission of offence by the public or by more than ten
persons.

117. Abetting commission of offence by the public or by more than
ten persons.--Whoever abets the commission of an offence by the public
generally or by any number or class of persons exceeding ten, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.

1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for
life".

125

Illustration

A affixes in a public place a placard instigating a _ sect
consisting of more than ten members to meet at a certain time and
place, for the purpose of attacking the members of an adverse sect,
while engaged in a procession. A has committed the offence defined in
this section.

118.

Concealing design to commit offence punishable with death or
imprisonment for life.

118. Concealing design to commit offence punishable with death or
imprisonment for life.--Whoever intending to facilitate or knowing it
to be ikely that he will thereby facilitate the commission of an
offence punishable with death or 1*[imprisonment for life],

voluntarily conceals, by any act or illega omission, the
existence of a design to commit such offence or makes any
representation which he knows to be false respecting such design,

if offence be committed-if offence be not committed.

if offence be committed-if offence be not committed.--shall, if


that offence be committed, be punished with imprisonment of either
description for aterm which may extend to seven years, or, if the
offence of not committed, with imprisonment of either description, for
a term which may extend to three years; and in either case shall also
be liable to fine.

Illustration

A, knowing that dacoity is about to be committed at B, falsely
informs the Magistrate that a dacoity is about to be committed at C, a
place in an opposite direction, and thereby misleads the Magistrate
with intent to facilitate the commission of the offence. The dacoity
is committed at B in pursuance of the design. A is punishable under
this section.

119.

Public servant concealing design to commit offence which it is his
duty to prevent.

119. Public servant concealing design to commit offence which it
is his duty to prevent.--Whoever, being a public servant intending to
facilitate or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby facilitate
the commission of an offence which it is his duty as such public
servant to prevent,

voluntarily conceals, by any act or illegal omission, the
existence of a design to commit such offence, or makes any
representation which he knows to be false respecting such design.

if offence be committed.

if offence be committed.--shall, if the offence be committed, be
punished with imprisonment of any description provided for the
offence, for a term which may extend to one-half of the longest term
of such imprisonment, or with such fine as is provided for that
offence, or with both;

if offence be punishable with death, etc.

if offence be punishable with death, etc.--or, if the offence be
punishable with death or 1* [imprisonment for life], with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten

years;

if offence be not committed.

if offence be not committed.--or, if th offenc b not



committed, shall be punished with imprisonment of any description
provided for the offence for a term which may extend to one-fourth
part of the longest term of such imprisonment or with such fine as is
provided for the offence, or with both.

Illustration

A, an officer of police, being legally bound to give information
of all designs to commit robbery which may come to his knowledge, and
knowing that B designs to commit robbery, omits to give such
information, with intent to facilitate the commission of that offence.
here A has by an illegal omission concealed th xistenc of B's
design and is liable to punishment according to the provision of this
section.

120.

Concealing design to commit offence punishable with imprisonment.

120. Concealing design to commit offence punishable with
imprisonment.-——-Whoever, intending to facilitate or knowing it to be
likely that he will thereby facilitate the commission of an offence
punishable with imprisonment,

voluntarily conceals, by any act or illegal omission, the
existence of a design to commit such offence, or makes any
representation which he knows to be false respecting such design,

1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for
life".

126

if offence be committed-if offence be not committed.

if offence be committed-if offence be not committed--shall, if
the offenc b committed, be punished with imprisonment of the
description provided for the offence, for a term which may extend to
one-fourth, and, if the offence be not committed, to one-eight, of the
longest term of such imprisonment, or with such fine as is provided
for the offence, or with both.

CHAPTER VA

CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY

1* [CHAPTER VA



CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY

120A.

Definition of criminal conspiracy.

120A. Definition of criminal conspiracy.--When two or more
persons agree to do, or cause to be done,

(1) an illegal act, or

(2) an act which is not illegal by illegal means, such an
agreement is designated a criminal conspiracy:

Provided that no agreement except an agreement to commit an
offence shall amount to a criminal conspiracy unless some act besides
the agreement is done by one or more parties to such agreement in
pursuance thereof.

Explanation.-It is immaterial whether the illegal act is the
ultimate object of such agreement, or is merely incidental to that
object.

120B.

Punishment of criminal conspiracy.

120B. Punishment of criminal conspiracy.--(1) Whoever is a party
to a criminal conspiracy to commit an offence punishable with death,
2*[imprisonment for life] or rigorous imprisonment for a term of two
years or upwards, shall, where no xpress provision is made in this

Code for the punishment of such a conspiracy, be punished in the same
manner as if he had abetted such offence.

(2) Whoever is a party to a criminal conspiracy other than a
criminal conspiracy to commit an offence punishable as aforesaid shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term not
exceeding six months, or with fine or with both.]

CHAPT!

GI

R VI

OF OFFENCES AGAINST THE STATE

CHAPTER VI

OF OFFENCES AGAINST THE STATE



121.

Waging, or attempting to wage war,
the Government of India.

or abetting waging of war,

against

121. Waging, or attempting to wage war, or abetting waging of
war, against the Government of India.--Whoever wages war against the
3* [Government of India], or attempts to wage such war, or abets the
waging of such war, shall be punished with death, or
4*[imprisonment for life] 5*[and shall also be liable to fine].

6* [Illustration. ]

7***A joins an insurrection against the

3* [Government of India].

A has committed the offence defined in this section.
gx * * * *

1. Ins. by Act 8 of 1913, s. 3.

2. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation".

3. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for "Queen".

4. Subs. by Act of 1955 s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for
life".

5. Subs. by Act 16 of 1921, s. 2, for "and shall forfeit all his
property".

6. Subs. by Act 36 of 1957, s. 3 and Sch. II, for "Illustrations".

7. The brackets and letter "(a)" omitted by s. 3 and Sch. II, ibid.

8. Tllus tration (b) rep. by the A. O. 1950.

127

121A.

Conspiracy to commit offences punishable by

t offence
2* [India]

section

to commi
without
by

1*[121A. Conspiracy
121.--Whoever within or
of the offences punishable
overawe, by means of
4*[the Central Government or
punished with 6* [imprisonment
either description which
be liable to fine].

State
life],

any
for

Explanat

criminal force or the show of

may extend to ten years,

1on.-To constitute a conspiracy under this section,

section 121.

Ss punishable by section
conspires to commit any
121, 3*** or conspires to
criminal force,
5***], shall be
imprisonment of

7*[and shall also

Government
or with

it is


not necessary that any act or illegal omission shall take place in
pursuance thereof. ]

122.

Collecting arms, etc., with intention of waging war against the
Government of India.

122. Collecting arms, etc., with intention of waging war against
the Government of India.--Whoever collects men, arms or ammunition or
otherwise prepares to wage war with the intention of either waging or
being prepared to wage war against the 8*[Government of India],
shall be punished with 9*[imprisonment for life] or imprisonment of
either description for a term not exceeding ten years, 10*[and shall
also be liable to fine

123.

Concealing with intent to facilitate design to wage war.

123. Concealing with intent to facilitate design to wage war.--
Whoever, by any act, or by any illega omission, conceals the
existence of a design to wage war against the 8*[Government of
India], intending by such concealment to facilitate, or knowing it to
be likely that such concealment wil facilitate, the waging of such
war, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to ten years, and sha also be liable to fine.

124.

Assaulting President, Governor, etc., with intent to compel or
restrain the exercise of any lawful power.

124. Assaulting President, Governor, etc., with intent to compel
or restrain the exercise of any lawful power.--Whoever, with the
intention of inducing or compelling the 11*[President] of India, or
12* [Governor 13***] of any State, 14*** 15*** 16*** to exercise or
refrain from exercising in any manner any of the lawful powers of such
17* [President or 12* [Governor 13*],

assaults or wrongfully restrains, or attempts wrongfully to
restrain, or overawes, by means of criminal force or the show of
criminal force, or attempts so to overawe, such 17*[President or 12***
[Governor 13***],

1. S. 121A ins. by Act 27 of 1870, s. 4.

2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the States".


3. The words “or to deprive th Queen of the sovereignty of the
Provinces or of any part thereof" omitted by the A. O. 1950.

4. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for "the G. of I. or any L. G.".
5. The words "or the Govt. of Burma" rep. by the A. O. 1948.
6. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation

for life or any shorter term".

7. Ins. by Act 16 of 1921, s. 3.

8. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for "Queen".

9. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation
for life".

10. Subs. by Act 16 of 1921, s. 2, for "and shall forfeit all his
property".

11. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for "Governor General".

12. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "Governor".

13. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the Adaptation of Laws (No.
2) Order, 1956.

14. The words "or a Leutenant-Governor" rep. by the A. O. 1937.

15. The words "or a Member of the Council of the Governor General of
India" rep. by the A. O. 1948.

16. The words "or of the Council of any Presidency" rep. by the A. O.
1937.

17. The original words "Governor General, Governor, Lieutenant—
Governor or Member of Council" have successively been amended by
the A.O. 1937, A. O. 1948 and A. O. 1950 to read as above.

128

shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to
fine.

124A.

Sedition.

1*[124A. Sedition.--Whoever by words, either spoken or written,
or by signs, or by visible representation, or otherwise, brings or
attempts to bring into hatred or contempt, or excites or attempts to


excite disaffection towards, 2***the Government established by law in
3* [India], a 4***shall be punished with 5*[imprisonment for life], to
which fine may be added, or with imprisonment which may extend to
three years, to which fine may be added, or with fine.

Explanation 1.-The expression "disaffection" includes disloyalty
and all feelings of enmity.

Explanation 2.-Comments expressing disapprobation of the measures
of the Government with a view to obtain their alteration by lawful
means, without exciting or attempting to excite hatred, contempt or
disaffection, do not constitute an offence under this section.

Explanation 3.-Comments expressing disapprobation of the
administrative or other action of the Government without exciting or
attempting to excite hatred, contempt or disaffection, do not
constitute an offence under this section. ]

125.

Waging war against any Asiatic Power in alliance with the Government
of India.

125. Waging war against any Asiatic Power in alliance with the
Government of India.--Whoever wages war against the Government of any
Asiatic Power in alliance or at peace with the 6*[Government of
India] or attempts to wage such war, or abets the waging of such war,
shall be punished with 7*[imprisonment for life], to which fine may
be added, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to seven years, to which fine may be added, or with fine.

126.

Committing depredation on territories of Power at peace with the
Government of India.

126. Committing depredation on territories of Power at peace with
the Government of India.--Whoever commits depredation, or makes
preparations to commit depredation, on the territories of any Power in
alliance or at peace with the 6*[Government of India], shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine and to
forfeiture of any property used or intended to be used in committing
such depredation, or acquired by such depredation.

127.

Receiving property taken by war or depredation mentioned in sections
125 and 126.


127. Receiving property taken by war or depredation mentioned in
sections 125 and 126.-Whoever receives any property knowing the same
to have been taken in the commission of any of th offences mentioned
in sections 125 and 126, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also
be liable to fine and to forfeiture of the property so received.

128.

Public servant voluntarily allowing prisoner of state or war to
escape.

128. Public servant voluntarily allowing prisoner of state or war
to scape.--Whoever, being a public servant and having the custody of
any State prisoner or prisoner of war, voluntarily allows such
prisoner to escape from any place in which such prisoner is confined,
shall be punished with 7*[imprisonment for life], or imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall
also be liable to fine.

1. Subs. by Act 4 of 1898, s. 4, for the original s. 124A which had
been ins. by Act 27 of 1870, s. 5.
2. The words "Her Majesty or" rep. by the A.O. 1950. The words "or

the Crown Representative" ins. after the word "Majesty" by the
A.O. 1937 were rep. by the A.O. 1948.

3. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the States".

4. The words "or British Burma" ins. by the A.O. 1937 rep. by the
A.O. 1948.

5. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for
life or any shorter term".

6. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for "Queen".

7. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and _ Sch., for "transportation

for life".

129

129.

Public servant negligently suffering such prisoner to escape.

129. Public servant negligently suffering such prisoner to
scape.--Whoever, being a public servant and having the custody of any
State prisoner or prisoner of war, negligently suffers such prisoner
to escape from any place of confinement in which such prisoner is
confined, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which
may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.

130.


Aiding escape of, rescuing or harbour

130. Aiding escape of, rescuing
Whoever knowingly aids or assists any
war in escaping from lawful custody,

ing such prisoner.

or harbouring
State prisoner
or rescues or

such prisoner.--
or prisoner of
attempts to rescue

any such prisoner, or harbours or conceals any such prisoner who has
escaped from lawful custody, or offers or attempts to offer any
resistance to the recapture of such prisoner shall be punished with
1*[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to
fine.

Explanation.-A State prisoner or prisoner of war, who is
permitted to be at large on his parole within certain limits in
2*[India], is said to escape from lawful custody if he goes beyond the
limits within which he is allowed to be at large.

CHAPTER VII
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO THE ARMY, [NAVY AND AIR FORCE]
CHAPTER VII
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO THE ARMY, 3* [NAVY AND AIR FORCE]
131.
Abetting mutiny, or attempting to seduce a soldier, sailor or airman

from his duty.

131. Abetting mutiny, or attempting

to seduce a soldier, sailor

or airman from his duty.--Whoever abets

officer, soldier, 4*[sailor or airman]
Force] of the 6*[Government of India]

officer, soldier, 4*[sailor or airman]
duty, shall be punished with 1*[impri
imprisonment of either description for a
years, and shall also be liable to fine.

this section

and "airman"]

7* [Explanation.-In
["soldier", 9*["sailor"]
the 10*[Army Act, 11*[the Army Act, 19
Discipline Act, 12***the Indian Navy
1934) ] 13* [the Air Force Act or 14*[th
1950) J as the case may be].]

1,

the committing of mutiny by an
, in the Army, 5*[Navy or Air
or attempts to seduce any such
from his allegiance or his
sonment for life], or with
term which may extend to ten

the words "officer", 8*
include any person subject to
50 (46 of 1950)], 9*[the Naval
(Discipline) Act,1934 (34 of
e Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of

Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and

Sch., for "transportation for


life".

Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the States".

Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and Sch. I, for "and Navy".

Subs. by s. 2 and Sch. I, ibid., for "or sailor".

Subs. by s. 2 and sch. I, ibid., for "or Navy".

Subs. by the A.O. 1950 for "Queen".

Ins. by Act 27 of 1870, s. 6.

Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and Sch. I, for "and soldier".

Ins. by Act 25 of 1934, s. 2 and Sch.

O. Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and Sch. I, for "Articles of War
for the better government of Her Majesty's Army, or to the
Articles of War contained in Act No. 5 of 1869".

11. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the Indian Army Act,

FPO WOT AND OH BW DN

1911".

12. The words "or that Act as modified by" were rep. by the A.O.
1950.

13. Subs. by Act 14 of 1932, s. 130 and Sch., for "or the Air Force
Act".

14. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s.3 and Sch., for "the Indian Air Force
Act, 1932".

130

132.

Abetment of mutiny, if mutiny is committed in consequence thereof.

132. Abetment of mutiny, if mutiny is committed in consequence
thereof.--Whoever abets the committing of mutiny by an officer,
soldier, 1*[sailor or airman], in the Army, 2*[Navy or Air Force] of
the 3*[Government of India], shall, if mutiny be committed in
consequence of that abetment, be punished with death or with
4*[imprisonment for life], or imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.

133.

Abetment of assault by soldier, sailor or airman on his superior
officer, when in execution of his office.

133. Abetment of assault by soldier, sailor or airman on his
superior officer, when in execution of his office.--Whoever abets an
assault by an officer, soldier, 1*[sailor or airman], in the Army,
2*[Navy or Air Force] of the 3*[Government of India], on any superior
officer being in the execution of his office, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three years, and shall also be liable to fine.

134.


Abetment of such assa

ult,

if the assault committed.

134. Abetment of such assault, if the assault committed.--Whoever
abets an assault by an officer, soldier, 1*[sailor or airman], in the
Army, 2*[Navy or Air Force] of the 3*[Government of India], on any
superior officer being in the execution of his office, shall, if such
assault be committed in consequence of that abetment be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.

135.

Abetment of desertion of soldier,

135. Abetment o
Whoever, abets the
airman], in the Arm

of India],

136.

Harbouring deserter.

136. Harbouring
excepted, knowing o
soldier, 1*[sailor or
the 3*[Government of
soldier, 1*[sailor or
either description f
fine or with both.

Exception.-—-This
the harbour is given

sailor or airman.

f desertion of soldier, sailor or airman.--
desertion of any officer, soldier, 1*[sailor or
y, 2*[Navy or Air Force] of the 3* [Government

imprisonment of either description

shall be punished with
for a term which may extend to two

years, or with fine, or with both.
deserter.-——-Whoever, xcept as hereinafter

r having reason to believe that an officer,
airman], in the Army, 2*[Navy or Air Force] of
India], has deserted, harbours such officer,
airman], shall be punished with imprisonment of
or a term which may extend to two years, or with

provision
by a wife

does not extend to the case in which
to her husband.

137.
Deserter concealed on board merchant vessel through negligence of
master.

137. Deserter concealed on board merchant vessel through
negligence of master.--The master or person in charge of a merchant
vessel, on board of which any deserter from the Army, 2*[Navy or Air
Force] of the 3*[{Government of India] is concealed, shall, though
ignorant of such concealment, be liable to a penalty not exceeding



five hundred rupees, if he might have known of such concealment but
for some neglect of his duty as such master or person in charge, or
but for some want of discipline on board of the vessel.

138.

Abetment of act of insubordination by soldier, sailor or airman.

138. Abetment of act of insubordination by soldier, sailor or
airman.—-Whoever abets what he knows to be an act of insubordination by

an officer, soldier, 1*[sailor or airman], in the Army, 2*[Navy or air
Force], of the 3%* [Government of India], shall, if such act of
insubordination be committed in consequence of that abetment, be

punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.

138A.

[Repealed. ]

138A. [Application of foregoing sections to the Indian Marine
Service.] Rep. by the Amending Act, 1934 (35 of 1934), s. 2 and Sch.

1. Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and Sch. I, for “or sailor".

2. Subs. by s. 2 and Sch. I, ibid., for "or Navy".

3. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for "Queen".

4. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for
life".

131

139.

Persons subject to certain Acts.

139. Persons subject to certain Acts.--No person subject to 1*
[the Army Act, 2*[the Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950)], the Naval
Discipline Act, 3*[4***the Indian Navy (Discipline) Act, 1934 (34
of 1934)], 5*[the Air Force Act or 6*[the Air Force Act, 1950
(45 of 1950)]]], is subject to punishment under this Code for any of
the offences defined in this Chapter.

140.


Wearing garb or carrying token used by soldier,

140.

airman.—-—-Whoever,

M

ilitary,
wears

Wearing garb

8* [Naval or Air
any garb or carries any token resemb
by such a soldier,
be believed that he is such a so

or carrying token used by
being a soldier, 7*[sailor
service of the

soldier,

not or airman]

with
7*[sa

irman]
dier,

7* [sailor ora

ilor or airman],

months,

punished
extend to three
rupees, or with both.

7

CHAPTER VIII

OF OFF

141.

ENCES AGAINST THE

r

PUBLIC TRANQUILLITY

CHAPTER VIII

OF OFF

ENCES AGAINST THE

Unlawful assembly.

141. Unlawfu

designated an "un

composing that assembly is-

First.-
force, 10*[t
or the Legi
exercise of

Second.
process; or

Third.-
offence; or

Fourth.
force, to a
property, or
way, or of t
he is in
supposed rig

Fifth.-

force, to co
do,

or to omit to do what he

1 assembly.--An assembly of
lawful assembly",

To overawe
he Central
slature of
the lawful

force, or show of
or any State Government or
any State], or any public servant
power of such public servant; or

by criminal

-To resist the execution of any law,

To commit any mischief or criminal trespass,

of criminal force, or show of
to take or obtain possession
to deprive any person of the enjoyment of a
he use of water or other incorporeal right
possession or enjoyment, or to enforce any
ht; or

-By means
ny person

By means of criminal force, or show of
mpel any person to do what he is not legally
is legally entitled to do.

PUBLIC TRANQUILLITY

Par

or of any

sailor or airman.

sailor or

in the

9* [Government of India],
ing any garb or token used
the intention that it

may
be

shall

with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
or with fine which may extend to five hundred

five or more persons is
if the common object of the persons

criminal
Lament
in the

legal

or other

criminal

of any
right of
which
right or

criminal
bound to



Explanation.-An assembly which was not unlawful when it
assembled, may subsequently become an unlawful assembly.

142.

Being member of unlawful assembly.

142. Being member of unlawful assembly.-—-Whoever, being aware of
facts which render any assembly an unlawful assembly, intentionally
joins that assembly, or continues in it, is said to be a member of an
unlawful assembly.

1. Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and Sch. I, for "any Articles of
War for the Army or Navy of the Queen, or for any part of such
Army or Navy".

2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the Indian Army Act,
1911".

3. Ins. by Act 35 of 1934, s. 2 and Sch.

4. The words "or that Act as modifed by" rep. by the A.O. 1950.

5, Subs. by Act 14 of 1932, s. 130 and Sch., for "or the Air Force

Act".

6. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the Indian Air Force
Act, 1932".

7. Ins. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and Sch. I.

8. Subs. by s. 2 and Sch. I, ibid., for "or Naval".

9. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for "Queen".

10. Subs., ibid., for "the Central or any Provincial Government or
Legislature".

132

143.

Punishment.

143. Punishment.--Whoever is a member of an unlawful assembly,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.


144,

Joining unlawful assembly armed with deadly weapon.

144. Joining unlawful assembly armed with deadly weapon.--—
Whoever, being armed with any deadly weapon, or with anything which,
used as a weapon of offence, is likely to cause death, is a member of
an unlawful assembly, sha be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or
with both.

145.

Joining or continuing in unlawful assembly, knowing it has been
commanded to disperse.

145. Joining or continuing in unlawful assembly, knowing it has
been commanded to disperse.--Whoever joins or continues in an unlawful
assembly, knowing that such unlawful assembly has been commanded in
the manner prescribed by law to disperse, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extent to two
years, or with fine, or with both.

146.

Rioting.

146. Rioting.--Whenever force or violence is used by an unlawful
assembly, or by any member thereof, in prosecution of the common
object of such assembly, every member of such assembly is guilty of
the offence of rioting.

147.

Punishment for rioting.

147. Punishment for rioting.--Whoever is guilty of rioting, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.

148.

Rioting, armed with deadly weapon.


148. Rioting, armed with deadly weapon.--Whoever is guilty of
rioting, being armed with a deadly weapon or with anything which, used
as a weapon of offence, is likely to cause death, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three years, o

149.

Every member

r with fine, or with both.

of unlawful assembly guilty of offence committed in

prosecution of common object.

149. Every member of unlawful assembly guilty of offence
committed in prosecution of common object.--If an offence is committed
by any member of an unlawful assembly in prosecution of the common
object of that
to be likely to be committed in prosecution of that object, every

person who,

at

assembly, or such as the members of that assembly knew

the time of the committing of that offence, is a member

of the same assembly, is guilty of that offence.

150.

Hiring, or

con

150. Hiri

Who

niving at hiring, of persons to join unlawful assembly.

ng, or conniving at hiring, of persons to join unlawful

assembly.

ver hires or engages, or employes, or promotes, or

connives at the hiring, engagement or employment of any person to join
or become a m

member of such

com

as
com

151.

mitted by a

pursuance of such hiring, engagement or employment, in the same manner
i
m

mber of any unlawful assembly, shall be punishable as a
unlawful assembly, and for any offence which may be
ny such person as a member of such unlawful assembly in

f he had been a member of such unlawful assembly, or himself had
itted such offence.

Knowingly joining or continuing in assembly of five or more persons
after it has been commanded to disperse.

151. Knowingly joining or continuing in assembly of five or more
persons after
joins or continues in any assembly of five or more persons likely to
cause a disturbance of the public peace, after such assembly has been
lawfully commanded to disperse, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with

fine, or with both.

it has been commanded to disperse.-——-Whoever knowingly

Explanation.-If the assembly is an unlawful assembly within the


meaning of section 141, the offender will be punishable under section
145.

152.

Assaulting or obstructing public servant when suppressing riot, etc.

152. Assaulting or obstructing public servant when suppressing
riot, etc.--Whoever assaults or threatens to assault, or obstructs or
attempts to obstruct, any public servant in the discharge of his duty
as such public servant, in endeavouring to disperse an unlawful
assembly, or to suppress a riot or affray, or uses, or threatens, or
attempts to use criminal force to such public servant, sha be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.

133

153.

Want only giving provocation with intent to cause riot-if rioting be
committed:if not committed.

153. Want only giving provocation with intent to cause riot--if
rioting be committed: if not committed.—Whoever malignantly, or
wantonly by doing anything which is illegal, gives provocation to any
person intending or knowing it to be likely that such provocation will

cause the offence of rioting to be committed, shall, if the offence of
rioting be committed in consequence of such provocation, be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
one year, or with fine, or with both, and if the offence of rioting be
not committed, with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.

153A.

Promoting enmity between different groups on ground of religion, race,
place of birth, residence, language, etc., and doing acts prejudicial
to maintenance of harmony.

1*[153A. Promoting enmity between different groups on ground of
religion, race, place of birth, residence, language, etc., and doing
acts prejudicial to maintenance of harmony.--(1) Whoever-

(a) by words, either spoken or written, or by signs or by
visible representations or otherwise, promotes or attempts to
promote, on grounds of religion, race, place of birth, residence,
language, caste or community or any other ground whatsoever,



disharmony or
ifferent
castes or commun

d

(b)

of harmony between

regi
is

ona
ike

Q*
imi

ha
n

wing

(c) organizes
ar activity

use
it to be

Znn wn
t- O

use
partic
use cr

im

inal

fee

re racia

Ss,

lings of enmity,

igious,
ities,

or

commits any act wh

any

be trained
ikely

or be trained to

or

ich

different
groups or castes or communi
y to disturb the public tranquillity,

exercise,
intending that the participants in such act
to use cr
that the parti

crimi
intendi

use
ipates in such activity

rel

hatred
anguage

LS prejudicial to the
igi

or ill-wil
regional

or

m

ous, racial, la

Les, and which di

the participants

criminal
language
act
fear
relig

in such
force or vio
or regiona

a fee
racial,

community, ]

shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to

or with fine,

or with both.

force or violence
activi

ty wi

or knowing

2* [or]

movement, drill
nal force or v
cipants in such
nal force vi
ng to use or

it to

im]

or
be
be

1 between
groups or

aintenance
nguage or
sturbs or

or other
ivity
iolence or

activity
olence, or
trained to

l use or be trai

ence,
group
ivity for any reason whatsoever causes or
or alarm or

LOUS, anguage

against
caste

or

or

any religious
or community
is likely

ling of insecurity amongst members
regional

group or

thr

ikely that
ned to use
, vacial,
and such
to cause

of such
caste or

ee

years,

er commits

religious worship or

(2) Offence committed in place of worship, etc.--Whoev
an offence specified in sub-section (1) in any place of worship or in
any assembly engaged in the performance of
religious ceremonies, shall be

extend to five years and shall al

153B.

Imputations,

2*[153B.

integration.--(1)

Imputations,
Whoever,

punished with imprisonment which may

lso be liable to fine.]

assertions

by words either

assertions prejudicial to national integration.

to
wri

prejudicial
spoken or

signs or by visible representations or otherwise, —

national
tten or by

(a) makes or publishes any imputation that any class of
persons cannot, by reason of their being members of any
religious, racial, language or regiona group or caste or
community, bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of
India as by law established or uphold the sovereignty and
integrity of India, or

(b) asserts, counsels, advises, propagates or publishes that
any class of persons by reason of their being members of any
religious, racial, language or regional group or caste or
community be denied, or deprived of their rights as citizens of
India, or



1. Subs. by Act 35 of 1969, s. 2, for s. 153A.

2. Ins. by Act 31 of 1972, s. 2.

134

(c) makes or publishes and assertion, counsel, plea or

appeal concerning the obligation of any class of persons, by
reason of their being members of any religious, racial, language
or regional group or caste or community, and such assertion,
counsel, plea or appeal causes or is likely to cause disharmony
or feelings of enmity or hatred or l-wi between such members

and other persons,

shall be punished with
or with fine,

(2)

Whoever commits an

offenc

any place of worsh
religious worship
imprisonment which may
to fine].

154.

Lp or

in any

extend

specified
assembly engaged
or religious ceremonies,
to five years and shall also be liable

sha

imprisonment which may extend to
or with both.

in sub-section
in the performance of

be

three years,

(1), in

punished with

Owner or occupier of land on which an unlawful assembly is held.

154.

Owner or occupier of

land on

which an unla

wful assembly is

held.--Whenever any unlawful assembly or riot takes place, th owner
or occupier of the land upon which such unlawful assembly is held, or
such riot is committed, and any person having or claiming an interest
in such land, sha be punishable with fine not exceeding one thousand
rupees, if he or his agent or manager, knowing that such offence is
being or has been committed, or having reason to believe it is likely
to be committed, do not give the earliest notice thereof in his or

their power to t

he principal

officer at

and do not, int

it was about to be committed, use all lawfu
power to prevent it and, in the event of its
all lawfu means in h

riot or unlawful assembly.

155.

he case of

the nearest police-station,
his or their having reason to be
means in his or their
taking place,
is or their power to disperse or suppress the

Leve that

do not use

Liability of person for whose benefit riot is committed.

155.
Whenever a riot
person who

is the owner or

Liability of person for whose benefit
is committed for

the

benefi

xr

t or

occupier of any

iot
on

is committed.--
behalf of any

land respecting which such


riot takes place or who claims any interest in such land, or in the
subject of any dispute which gave rise to the riot, or who has
accepted or derived any benefit therefrom, such person shall be
punishable with fine, if he or his agent or manager, having reason to
believe that such riot was likely to be committed or that the unlawful
assembly by which such riot was committed was likely to be held, shall
not respectively use a lawful means in his or their power to prevent
such assembly or riot from taking place, and for suppressing and
dispersing the same.

156.

Liability of agent of owner or occupier for whose benefit riot is
committed.

156. Liability of agent of owner or occupier for whose benefit
riot is committed.--Whenever a riot is committed for the benefit or on
behalf of any person who is the owner or occupier of any land
respecting which such riot takes place, or who claims any interest in
such land, or in the subject of any dispute which gave rise to the
riot, or who has accepted or derived any benefit therefrom,

the agent or manager of such person shall be punishable with

ine, if such agent or manager, having reason to believe that such
iot was likely to be committed, or that the unlawful assembly by
hich such riot was committed was likely to be held, shall not use all
awful means in his power to prevent such riot or assembly from taking
lace and for suppressing and dispersing the same.

OH EK Hh

157.

Harbouring persons hired for an unlawful assembly.

157. Harbouring persons hired for an unlawful assembly.--Whoever
harbours, receives or assembles, in any house or premises in his
occupation or charge, or under his control any persons knowing that
such persons have been hired, engaged or employed, or are about to be
hired, engaged or employed, to join or become members of an unlawful
assembly, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.

158.

Being hired to take part in an unlawful assembly or riot;

158. Being hired to take part in an unlawful assembly or riot;--
Whoever is engaged, or hired, or offers or attempts to be hired or



engaged, to do or assist in doing any of the acts specified in section
141, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.

135

or to go armed.

or to go armed.--and whoever, being so engaged or hired as
aforesaid, goes armed, or engages or offers to go armed, with any
deadly weapon or with anything which used as a weapon of offence is
likely to cause death, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or
with both.

159.

Affray.

159. Affray.--When two or more persons, by fighting in a public
place, disturb the public peace, they are said to "commit an affray".

160.

Punishment for committing affray.

160. Punishment for committing affray.--Whoever commits an
affray, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to
one hundred rupees, or with both.

CHAPT!

GI
Ww

IX

r

OF OFFENCES BY OR RELATING TO PUBLIC SERVANTS

CHAPTER IX

OF OFFENCES BY OR RELATING TO PUBLIC SERVANTS

161 to 165A.

161 to 165A.Rep. by the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (49 of
1988), s. 31.


166.

Public servant disobeying law, with intent to cause injury to any
person.

166. Public servant disobeying law, with intent to cause injury
to any person.--Whoever, being a public servant, knowingly disobeys

any direction of the law as to the way in which he is to conduct
himself as such public servant, intending to cause, or knowing it to
be likely that he will, by such disobedience, cause injury to any
person, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which

may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.

IIIustration

A, being an officer directed by law to take property in execution,
in order to satisfy a decree pronounced in Z's favour by a Court of
Justice, knowingly disobeys that direction of law, with the knowledge
that he is likely thereby to cause injury to Z. A has committed the
offence defined in this section.

167.

Public servant framing an incorrect document with intent to cause
injury.

167. Public servant framing an incorrect document with intent to
cause injury.--Whoever, being a public servant, and being, as such
public servant, charged with the preparation or translation of any
document, frames or translates that document in a manner which he
knows or believes to be incorrect, intending thereby to cause or
knowing it to be likely that he may thereby cause injury to any
person, sha be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.

168.

Public servant unlawfully engaging in trade.

168. Public servant unlawfully engaging in trade.--Whoever, being
a public servant, and being legally bound as such public servant not
to engages in trade, engages in trade, shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or
with both.

169.


Public servant unlawfully buying or bidding for property.

169. Public servant unlawfully buying or bidding for property.--
Whoever, being a public servant, and being legally bound as such
public servant, not to purchase or bid for certain property, purchases
or bids for that property, either in his own name or in the name of
another, or jointly, or in shares with others, shall be punished with
Simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with
fine, or with both; and the property, if purchased, shall be
confiscated.

170.

Personating a public servant.

170. Personating a public servant.--Whoever pretends to hold any
particular office as public servant, knowing that he does not hold
such office or falsely personates any other person holding such
office, and in such assumed character does or attempts to do any act
under colour of such office, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with
fine, or with both.

136

171.

Wearing garb or carrying token used by public servant with fraudulent
intent.

171. Wearing garb or carrying token used by public servant with
fraudulent intent.--Whoever, not belonging to a certain class of
public servants, wears any garb or carries any token resembling any
garb or token used by that class of public servants, with the
intention that it may be believed, or with the knowledge that it is
ikely to be believed, that he belongs to that class of public
servants, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description,
for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may
extend to two hundred rupees, or with both.

7

CHAPTER IXA

OF OFFENCES RELATING TO ELECTIONS

1* [CHAPTER IXA



OF OFFENCES RELATING TO

Tr
4

JECTIONS

171A.

"Candidate", "Electoral right" defined.

171A. "Candidate", "Electoral right" defined.--For the purposes
of this Chapter-

2*[(a) "candidate" means a person who has been nominated as
a candidate at any election; ]

(b) "electoral right" means the right of a person to stand,
or not to stand as, or to withdraw from being, a candidate or to
vote or refrain from voting at an election.

171B.

Bribery.

171B. Bribery.--(1) Whoever-

(i) gives a gratification to any person with the object of
inducing him or any other person to exercise any electoral right
or of rewarding any person for having exercised any such right;
or

—

ii) accepts either for himself or for any other person any
gratification as a reward for exercising any such right or for
inducing or attempting to induce any other person to exercise any
such right,

commits the offence of bribery:

Provided that a declaration of public policy or a promise of
public action shall not be an offence under this section.

(2) A person who offers, or agrees to give, or offers or attempts
to procure, a gratification shall be deemed to give a gratification.

(3) A person who obtains or agrees to accept or attempts to
obtain a gratification shall be deemed to accept a gratification, and
a person who accepts a gratification as a motive for doing what he
does not intend to do, or as a reward for doing what he has not done,
shall be deemed to have accepted the gratification as a reward.

171C.

Undue influence at elections.


171C.
interferes

Undue influence at elections.--(1)

Whoever voluntarily

or attempts to interfere with th fr xercis of any
electoral right commits the offence of undue influence at an election.

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-

section (1

), whoever-—

(a) threatens any candidate or voter,

a candidate or voter is interested, with

or any person in whom
injury of any kind, or

(b) induces or attempts to induce a candidate or voter to
believe that he or any person in whom he is interested will
become or will be rendered an object of Divine displeasure or of
spiritual censure,

shall be deemed to interfere with the fr xercis of the electoral
right of such candidate or voter, within the meaning of sub-section
(1).

1. Chapter IXA was ins. by Act 39 of 1920, s. 2.

2. Subs. by Act 40 of 1975, s. 9. for cl. (a), (W.e.f. 6-8-1975).
137

(3) A
or the mer

declaration of public policy or a promise of public action,

xercise or a legal right without intent to interfere with

an electoral right, shall not be deemed to be interferenc within the

meaning of

171D.

this section.

Personation at elections.

171D.
for a voti
living or

Personation at elections.--Whoever at an election applies
ng paper on votes in the name of any other person, whether

dead, or in a fictitious name, or who

having voted once at

such election applies at the same election for a voting paper in his
and whoever abets, procures or attempts to procure the
y any person in any such way, commits the offence of

own name,
voting b
personatio

171E.

Punishment

171E.

n at an election.

for bribery.

Punishment for bribery.--Whoever commits the offence of
bribery shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for


a ter

only.

171F.

Punishment for

m which may extend to one year,

Provided that bribery by treating

Explanation.-—"Treating" means
gratification consists in food, drink,

or with fine, or with both:

shall be punished with fine

that form of bribery where the

entertainment, or provision.

undue influence or personation at an election.

171F. Punishment for undue influence or personation at an
election.--Whoever commits the offence of undue influence or
personation at an election shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to one year or with
fine, or with both.
171G.
False statement in connection with an election.

171G. False statement in connection with an election.--Whoever
with intent to affect the result of an election makes or publishes any
statement purporting to be a statement of fact which is false and
which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to
be true, in relation to the personal character or conduct of any
candidate shall be punished with fine.
171H.
Tllegal payments in connection with an election.

171H. Illegal payments in connection with an election.-——-Whoever
without the general or specia authority in writing of a candidate
incurs or authorizes expenses on account of the holding of any public
meeting, or upon any advertisement, circular or publication, or in any
other way whatsoever for the purpose of promoting or procuring the
election of such candidate, shall be punished with fine which may

extend to five

Provided t
the a
ten days from t

exceeding

approval

in writing of

hundred rupees

hat if any person having incurred any such expenses not

mount of ten rupees without authority obtains within
he date on which’ such xpenses wer incurred the
the candidate, he shall be deemed to have

incurred such expenses with the authority of the candidate.


171-1.

Failure to keep election accounts.

171-I. Failure to keep election accounts.-——-Whoever being required
by any law for the time being in force or any rule having the force of
law to keep accounts of expenses incurred at or in connection with an
election fails to keep such accounts shall be punished with fine which
may extend to five hundred rupees. ]

CHAPTER X

OF CONTEMPTS OF THE LAWFUL AUTHORITY OF PUBLIC SERVANTS

CHAPTER X

OF CONTEMPTS OF THE LAWFUL AUTHORITY OF PUBLIC SERVANTS

172.

Absconding to avoid service of summons or other proceeding.

172. Absconding to avoid service of summons or other proceeding.-—
Whoever absconds in order to avoid being served with a summons,
notice or order proceeding from any public servant legally competent,
as such public servant, to issue such summons, notice or order, shall
be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one month, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or
with both;

or, if the summons or notice or order is to attend in person or
by agent, or to produce a document in a Court of Justice, with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine
which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.

138

173.

Preventing service of summons or other proceeding, or preventing
publication thereof.

173. Preventing service of summons or other proceeding, or
preventing publication thereof.--Whoever in any manner intentionally
prevents the serving on himself, or on any other person, of any
summons, notice or order proceeding from any public servant legally



competent, such public servant, to issue such summons, notice or
order,

or intentionally prevents the lawful affixing to any place of any
such summons, notice or order,

or intentionally removes any such summons, notice or order from
any place to which it is lawfully affixed,

or intentionally prevents the lawful making of any proclamation,
under the authority of any public servant legally competent, as such
public servant, to direct such proclamation to be made,

shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may
extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to five hundred
rupees, or with both;

or, if the summons, notice, order or proclamation is to attend in
person or by agent, or to produce a document in a Court of Justice,
with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.

174.

Non-attendance in obedience to an order from public servant.

174. Non-attendance in obedience to an order from public
servant.--Whoever, being gally bound to attend in person or by an
agent at a certain place and time in obedience to a summons, notice,
order, or proclamation proceeding from any public servant legally

competent, as such public servant, to issue the same,

intentionally omits to attend at that place or time, or departs
from the place where he is bound to attend before the time at which it
is lawful for him to depart,

shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may
extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to five hundred
rupees, or with both;

or, if the summons, notice, order or proclamation is to attend in
person or by agent in a Court of Justice, with simple imprisonment for
a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend
to one thousand rupees, or with both.

Illustrations

(a) A, being legally bound to appear befor th 1*[High Court]
at Calcutta, in obedience to a subpoena issuing from that Court,
intentionally omits to appear. A has committed the offence defined in
this section.

(b) A, being legally bound to appear before a 2*[District
Judge], as a witness, in obedience to a summons issued by that


2* [District Judge] intentionally omits to appear. A has committed the
offence defined in this section.

175.

Omission to produce document to public servant by person legally bound
to produce it.

175. Omission to produce document to public servant by person
legally bound to produce it.--Whoever, being legally bound to produce
or deliver up any document to any public servant, as such,
intentionally omits so to produce or deliver up the same, shall be
punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one
month, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with
both;

1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for "Supreme Court".
2. Subs. ibid., for "Zila Judge".
139

or, if the document is to be produced or delivered up to a Court
of Justice, with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to
six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or
with both.

Illustration

A, being legally bound to produce a document before a
1* [District court], intentionally omits to produce the same. A has
committed the offence defined in this section.

176.

Omission to give notice or information to public servant by person
legally bound to give it.

176. Omission to give notice or information to public servant by
person legally bound to give it.--Whoever, being legally bound to give
any notice or to furnish information on any subject to any public
servant, as such, intentionally omits to give such notice or to
furnish such information in the manner and at the time required by
law, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may
extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to five hundred
rupees, or with both;

or, if the notice or information required to be given respects
the commission of an offence, or is required for the purpose of
preventing the commission of an offence, or in order to the
apprehension of an offender, with simple imprisonment for a term which



may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one
thousand rupees, or with both;

2*[or, if the notice or information required to be given is
required by an order passed under sub-section (1) of section 565 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with
fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.]

177.

Furnishing false information.

177. Furnishing false information.--Whoever, being legally bound
to furnish information on any subject to any public servant, as such,
furnishes, as true, information on the subject which he knows or has
reason to believe to be false shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine
which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both;

or, if the information which he is legally bound to give respects
the commission of an offence, or is required for the purpose of
preventing the commission of an offence, or in order to the

apprehension of an offender, with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.

Tllustrations

(a) A, a landholder, knowing of the commission of a murder within
the limits of his estate, wilfully misinforms the Magistrate of the
district that the death has occurred by accident in consequence of the
bite of a snake. A is guilty of the offence defined in this section.

(b) A, a village watchman, knowing that a considerable body of
strangers has passed through his village in order to commit a dacoity
in the house of Z, a wealthy merchant residing in a neighbouring
place, and being bound under clause 5, section VII, 3*Regulation
III, 1821, of the Bengal Code, to give early and punctual information
of the above fact to the officer of the nearest police station,
wilfully misinforms the police officer that a body of suspicious
characters passed through the village with a view to commit dacoity in
a certain distant place in a different direction. Here A is guilty of
the offence defined in the latter part of this section.

1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for "Zila Court".
2. Ins. by Act 22 of 1939, s. 2.

3. Rep. by Act 17 of 1862.

140

1*[Explanation.-In section 176 and in this section the word


"offence" includes any act committed at any place out of 2*[India],
which, if committed in 2*[India], would be punishable under any of the
following sections, namely, 302, 304, 382, 392, 393, 394, 395, 396,
397, 398, 399, 402, 435, 436, 449, 450, 457, 458, 459 and 460; and the
word "offender" includes any person who is alleged to have been guilty
of any such act.]

178.

Refusing oath or affirmation when duly required by public servant to
make it.

178. Refusing oath or affirmation when duly required by public
servant to make it.--Whoever refuses to bind himself by an oath 3*[or
affirmation] to state the truth, when required so to bind himself by a
public servant egally competent to require that he shall so bind
himself, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which
may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to. one
thousand rupees, or with both.

179.

Refusing to answer public servant authorized to question.

179. Refusing to answer public servant authorized to question.--
Whoever, being legally bound to state the truth on any subject to any
public servant, refuses to answer any question demanded of him
touching that subject by such public servant in the exercise of the
egal powers of such public servant, shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine
which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.

180.

Refusing to sign statement.

180. Refusing to sign statement .—--Whoever refuses to sign any
statement made by him, when required to sign that statement by a
public servant legally competent to require that he shall sign that
statement, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which
may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five
hundred rupees, or with both.

181.

False statement on oath or affirmation to public servant or person


authorized to administer an oath or affirmation.

181.
person authorized to

administer

False statement on oath or affir

an

servant or
affirmation.——-Whoever,

mation to public
or

oath

being legally bound by
on any
to administer such oath 3

subject to any public servant or ot

an oath 3*[or affirmation]

*for affirmation

l,

makes,

her person authorized by

to state the truth
law
public

to such

servant or other

statement which is f
false or does not
imprisonment of eit
three years, and sha

person as aforesaid,

alse, and which he eit
believe to be
her description for a
] a

her
true,

touching that subject, any

knows or believes to be
shall be punished with
term which may extend to

so be liable to fine.

182.

with intent
injury of an

False information,
lawful power to the

4*[182. False
to use his lawfu
gives to any public servant any
to be false, intending thereby t
that he will thereby cause such

information,
power to th

(a) to do or omit anyt
not to do or omit if the tr
such information is given w

(b) to use the lawful
njury or annoyance of any

H-

shall be punished with imprisonm
which may extend to six months,
thousand rupees, or with both.

to cause public servant to use his

other person.

with intent to cause public servant
e injury of another person.-—-Whoever
information which he knows or believes
o cause, or knowing it to be likely
public servant-

servant
respecting

hing which such public
ue state of facts
ere known by him, or

ought
which

power of to the

person,

such public servant

a term
to one

ent of either description for
or with fine which may extend

ns. by Act 3 of 1894, s. 5

Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s.

Ins. by Act 10 of 1873, s.

Subs. by Act 3 of 1895, s.

141

3 and sch. for "the States".

15.
182.

1, for the original s.

(a) A informs a
to such Magistrate,
knowing such informa
the information will
committed the offenc

Illustrations

Magistrate that Z,
has been guilty of neglect
tion to be false,

cause the Magistrate
defined in this section.

and knowing it

a police-officer,

of duty or
to be
ismiss

to d

subordinate
misconduct,
likely that

Z. A has



(b) A falsely informs a public servant that Z has contraband salt
in a secret place, knowing such information to be false, and knowing
that it is likely that the consequence of the information will bea
search of Z's premises, attended with annoyance to Z. A has committed
the offence defined in this section.

(c) A falsely informs a policeman that he has been assaulted and
robbed in the neighbourhood of a particular village. He does not
mention the name of any person as one of his assailants, but knows it
to be likely that in consequence of this information the police will
make enquiries and institute searches in the village to the annoyance
of the villagers or some of them. A has committed an offence under
this section. ]

183.

Resistance to the taking of property by the lawful authority of a
public servant.

183. Resistance to the taking of property by the lawful authority
of a public servant.--Whoever offers any resistance to the taking of
any property by the lawful authority of any public servant, knowing or
having reason to believe that he is such public’ servant, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand
rupees, or with both.

184.

Obstructing sale of property offered for sale by authority of public
servant.

184. Obstructing sale of property offered for sale by authority
of public servant.--Whoever intentionally obstructs any sale of
property offered for sale by the awfu authority of any public
servant, as such, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine
which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.

185.

Tllegal purchase or bid for property offered for sale by authority of
public servant.

185. Illegal purchase or bid for property offered for sale by
authority of public servant.--Whoever, at any sale of property held by
the lawful authority of a public servant, as such, purchases or bids



for any property on account of any person, whether himself or any
other, whom he knows to be under a legal incapacity to purchase that
property at that sale, or bids for such property not intending to
perform the obligations under which he lays himself by such bidding,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to two
hundred rupees, or with both.

186.

Obstructing public servant

186.
functions
discharge
of either

.--Whoever voluntari

in disc

Obstructing public s
y ob
of his public functions,

description for a term

harge of public functions.

ervant in discharge of public
structs any public servant in the
shall be punished with imprisonment

which may extend to three months, or

with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees,

or with both.

187.

Omission to assist servant when bound law to

assistance.

public by give

187. Omission to assist public servant when
assistanc Whoever, being bound by law to render or furnish
assistance to any public servant in the execution of his public duty,
intentionally omits to give such assistance, shall be punished with
simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with
fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, or with both;

bound by law to give

servant
executing
preventing

demanded of him
demand for the
a Court of

and if such assistance be
legally competent to make such
any process lawfully issued by

by a
purposes
Justice, or

public
of
of

the commission of an offence, or suppressing a riot, or affray, or of
apprehending a person charged with or guilty of an offence, or of
having escaped from lawful custody, sha be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine
which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.
142
188.
Disobedience to order duly promulgated by public servant.

188. Disobedience to order duly promulgated by public servant.--
Whoever, knowing that, by an order promulgated by a public servant

lawfully empowered to promulgate such order, he is directed to abstain


from a certain act, or to take certain order with certain property in
his possession or under his management. disobeys such direction,

shall, if such disobedience causes or tends to cause obstruction,
annoyance or injury, or risk of obstruction, annoyance or injury, to
any persons lawfully employed, be punished with simple imprisonment
for a term which may extend to one month or with fine which may extend
to two hundred rupees, or with both:

and if such disobedience causes or tends to cause danger to human
life, health or safety, or causes or tends to cause a riot or affray,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one
thousand rupees, or with both.

Explanation.-It is not necessary that the offender should intend
to produce harm, or contemplate his disobedience as likely to produce
harm. It is sufficient that he knows of the order which he disobeys,
and that his disobedience produces, or is likely to produce, harm.

Illustration

An order is promulgated by a public servant lawfully empowered to
promulgated such order, directing that a religious procession shall
not pass down a certain street. A knowingly disobeys the order, and
thereby causes danger of riot. A has committed the offenc defined in
this section.

189.

Threat of injury to public servant.

189. Threat of injury to public servant.-——-Whoever holds out any
threat of injury to any public servant, or to any person in whom he
believes that public servant to be interested, for the purpose of
inducing that public servant to do any act, or to forbear or delay to
do any act, connected with the exercise of the public functions of
such public servant, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or
with both.

190.

Threat of injury to induce person to refrain from applying for
protection to public servant.

190. Threat of injury to induce person to refrain from applying
for protection to public servant.--Whoever holds out any threat of
injury to any person for the purpose of inducing that person to
refrain or desist from making a legal application for protection
against any injury to any public servant legally empowered as such to



give such protection,
be punished with

may extend to one year,

CHAPTER XI

OF FAL

EVID

ENCE

AND

or to cause such protection to be
imprisonment of either description for a
or with both.

or with fine,

PD

OFE

ENC

ES AGAINST

CHAPT

eal

R

OF FALSE

EVID

ENCE

AND OFFENC

191.

Giving false evidence.

PUBLIC JUSTIC!

XI

ES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTIC!

sha
whi

given,
term

Gl

Gl

191. Giving fals
oath or by an express
bound by law
statement whic

h is fal

to make a declaration

videnc Whoever,
provision of law to
upon

LSE€,

false or does

anation 1.-A

it is

Exp
whether

Explanation 2.-A

not beli

leve to be true,

statement

false statement

11
ch

being legally bound by an

state
any

is within the meaning of this
made verbally or otherwise.

as to the belief of

attesting is within the meaning of this section,

guilty of giv

wh
wh

143

(a) A,
thousand rupees,

ich he does not believe,
ich he does not know.

in support of a just
falsely swears on a trial

Illustrations

claim

ing false evidence by stating that he
as well as by stating that he knows a thi

that

the
subject,

truth, or bei
makes a

and which he either knows or believes to
is said to gi

Vv videnc

fals

secti

the
and a person
believes

pers
may

a thi

which B has against Z for o

he heard Z admit t

justice of B's claim. A has given false evidence.

(b)

not believe it
knows to be false,

(c)

A, knowing the general character

A, being bound by an oath to state the
believes a certain signature to be the handwriting of Z,
to be the handwriting of Z.
and therefore gives false evidence.

Here

of Z'

that he believes a certain signature to be the

good faith believing

it to be so.

his belief,
signature may
evidence.

not

and is true as to his belief,
be the handwriting of Z,

and t
A

states that
when he do
A states that which

truth,

stat
A

handwriting,
of Z;

s
handwriting

herefore,
has not

a
gi

lthough t
ven fal

ng
ny
be

on

on
be
ng
ng

ne

ne
es
ne

es
in

Here A's statement is merely as to

he
se


(d) A, being bound by an oath to state the truth, states that he
knows that Z was at a particular place on a particular day, not
knowing anything upon the subject. A gives fals vidence whether Z
was at that place on the day named or not.

(e) A, an interpreter or translator, gives or certifies as a true
interpretation or translation of a statement or document, which he is
bound by oath to interpret or translate truly, that which is not and
which he does not believe to be a true interpretation or translation.
A has given false evidence.

192.

Fabricating false evidence.

192. Fabricating fals vidence.-——-Whoever causes any circumstance
to exist or makes any false entry in any book or record, or makes any
document containing a false statement, intending that such

circumstance, false entry or false statement may appear in evidence in
a judicial proceeding, or in a proceeding taken by law before a public
servant as such, or before an arbitrator, and that such circumstance,
false entry or false statement, so appearing in evidence, may cause
any person who in such proceeding is to form an opinion upon the
vidence, to entertain an erroneous opinion touching any point
material to the result of such proceeding is said "to fabricate false
evidence".

Illustrations

(a) A puts jewels into a box belonging to Z, with the intention
that they may be found in that box, and that this circumstance may
cause Z to be convicted of theft. A has fabricated false evidence.

(b) A makes a false entry in his shop-book for the purpose of
using it as corroborative evidence in a Court of Justice. A has
fabricated false evidence.

(c) A, with the intention of causing 2 to _ be convicted of a
criminal conspiracy, writes a letter in imitation of Z's handwriting,
purporting to be addressed to an accomplice in such criminal
conspiracy, and puts the letter in a place which he knows that the
officers of the police are likely to search. A has fabricated false
evidence.

193.

Punishment for false evidence.

193. Punishment for fals vidence.--Whoever intentionally gives
false evidence in any of a judicial proceeding, or fabricates false


evidence for the purpose of being used in any stage of a judicial
proceeding, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be table
to fine;

and whoever intentionally gives or fabricates false evidence in
any other case, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also
be liable to fine.

144

Explanation 1.-A trial before a Court-martial 1****is a judicial
proceeding.

Explanation 2.-An investigation directed by law preliminary to a
proceeding before a Court of Justice, is a stage of a judicial
proceeding, though that investigation may not take place before a
Court of Justice.

Illustration

A, in an enquiry before a Magistrate for the purpose of
ascertaining whether Z ought to be committed for trial, makes on oath
a statement which he knows to be false. As this enquiry is a stage of
a judicial proceeding, A as given false evidence.

Explanation 3.-An investigation directed by a Court of Justice
according to law, and conducted under the authority of a Court of
Justice, is a stage of a judicial proceeding, though that
investigation may not take place before a Court of Justice.

Illustration

A, in an enquiry before an officer deputed by a Court of Justice
to ascertain on the spot the boundaries of land, makes on oatha
statement which he knows to be false. As this enquiry is a stage of a
judicial proceeding, A has given false evidence.

194.

Giving or fabricating false evidence with intent to procure conviction
of capital offence;

194. Giving or fabricating false evidence with intent to procure

conviction of capital offence.--Whoever gives or fabricates false

vidence, intending thereby to cause, or knowing it to be likely that
he will thereby cause, any person to be convicted of an offence which
1S capital 2*[by the laws for the time being in force in 3%*[India]]
sha be punished with 4*[imprisonment for life], or with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also
be liable to fine;



If innocent person be thereby convicted and executed.

If innocent person be thereby conviceted and executed.--and if an
innocent person be convicted and executed in consequence of such false
vidence, the person who gives such false evidence shall be punished
either with death or the punishment hereinbefore described.

195.

Giving or fabricating false evidence with intent to procure conviction
of offence punishable with imprisonment for life or imprisonment.

195. Giving or fabricating false evidence with intent to procure
conviction of offence punishable with imprisonment for life or

imprisonment.--Whoever gives or fabricates fals videnc intending
thereby to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby
cause, any person to be convicted of an offence which 2*[by the law
for the time being in force in 3* [India] ] is not capital, but

punishable with 4*[imprisonment for life], or imprisonment for a term
of seven years or upwards, shall be punished as a person convicted of
that offence would be liable to be punished.

Illustration

A gives fals videnc befor a Court of Justice, intending
thereby to cause Z to be convicted of a dacoity. The punishment of
dacoity is 4*[imprisonment for life], or rigorous imprisonment for
a term which may extend to ten years, with or without fine. A,
therefore, is liable to 5*[imprisonment for life] or imprisonment,
with or without fine.

196.

Using evidence known to be false.

196. Using evidence known to be false.--Whoever corruptly uses or
attempts to use as true or genuin videnc any evidence which he
knows to be false or fabricated, sha be punished in the same manner
as if he gave or fabricated false evidence.

1. The words "or before a Military Court of Request" were omitted by
the Cantonments Act, 1889 (13 of 1889).

2. Subs. by the A.O. 1948, for "by the law of British India or
England".

3. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the States".


4. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for

life".
5. Subs. by s. 117 and Sch., ibid., for "such transportation".
145
197.

Issuing or signing false certificate.

197. Issuing or signing false certificate.--Whoever issues or
signs any certificate required by law to be given or signed, or
relating to any fact of which such certificate is by law admissible in
evidence, knowing or believing that such certificate is false in any
material point, shall be punished in the same manner as if he _ gave
false evidence.

198.

Using as true a certificate known to be false.

198. Using as true a certificate known to be false.--Whoever
corruptly uses or attempts to use any such certificate as a true
certificate, knowing the same to be false in any material point, shall
be punished in the same manner as if he gave fals videnc

199.

False statement made in declaration which is by law receivable as
evidence.

199. False statement made in declaration which is by law
receivable as vidence.--Whoever, in any declaration made or
subscribed by him, which declaration any Court of Justice, or any
public servant or other person, is bound or authorized by law to
receive as evidence of any fact, makes any statement which is false,
and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe
to be true, touching any point material to the object for which the
declaration is made or used, shall be punished in the same manner as
if he gave fals videnc

200.

Using as true such declaration knowing it to be false.


200. Using as true such declaration knowing it to be flase.-—-
Whoever corruptly uses or attempts to use as true any such
declaration, knowing the same to be false in any material point, shall
be punished in the same manner as if he gave fals videnc

Explanation.-A declaration which is inadmissible merely upon the
ground of some informality, is a declaration within the meaning of
sections 199 and 200.

201.
Causing disappearance of evidence of offence, or giving false
information to screen offender.

201. Causing disappearance of videnc of offence, or giving
false information to screen offender.-——-Whoever, knowing or having
reason to believe that an offence has been committed, causes any
evidence of the commission of that offence to disappear, with the
intention of screening the offender from legal punishment, or with
that intention gives any information respecting the offence which he

knows or believes to be false,

if a capital offence;
if a capital offence.--shall, if the offence
believes to have been committed

is punishable with death, be

which he

with
seven years,

and shall also be liab

if punishable with imprisonment for life;

if pun
punishable with 1* [imprisonment for
which may extend to ten years, shall
either description for a term which
shall also be liable to fine;

life]

may

if punishable with less than ten years'

if
and if

punishable with less than
the offence is punishable with impr

ishable with imprisonment for life.--—and

1,

ten

if
ith

or WwW

to three years,

imprisonment.

years'
isonment for any term

extending to ten years,
description provided for the offence, for a
one-fourth part of the longest term of the
the offence, or with fine, or with both.

Illustration

shall be punished with imprisonment

of
term which may extend

imprisonment provided

knows or
punished
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
e to fine;

the offence is

imprisonment
be punished with imprisonment of
extend

and

imprisonment .-——

not
the

to
for


A, knowing that B has murdered Z, assists B to hide the body with
the intention of screening B from punishment. A is liable to
imprisonment of either description for seven years, and also to fine.

202.

Intentional omission to give information of offence by person bound to
inform.

202. Intentional omission to give information of offence by
person bound to inform.-——-Whoever, knowing or having reason to believe
that an offence has been committed, intentionally omits to give any
information respecting that offence which he is legally bound to give,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.

1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for
life".

146

203.

Giving false information respecting an offence committed.

203. Giving false information respecting an offence committed.-—-—
Whoever, knowing or having reason to believe that an offence has been
committed, gives any information respecting that offence which he
knows or believes to be false, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with
fine, or with both.

1*[Explanation.-In spections 201 and 202 and in this section
the word "offence" includes any act committed at any place out of
2* [India], which, if committed in 2*[India], would be punishable under
any of the following sections, namely, 302, 304, 382, 392, 393, 394,
395, 396, 397, 398, 399, 402, 435, 436, 449, 450, 457, 458, 459 and
460.]

204.

Destruction of document to prevent its production as evidence.

204. Destruction of document to prevent its production as
vidence.--Whoever secrets or destroys any document which he may be
lawfully compelled to produce as evidence in a Court of Justice, or in
any proceeding lawfully held before a public servant, as such, or



obliterates or renders illegible the whole or any part of such
document with the intention of preventing the same from being produced
or used as evidence befor such Court or public servant as aforesaid,
or after he shall have been lawfully summoned or required to produce
the same for that purpose, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with
fine, or with both.

205.
False personation for purpose of act or proceeding in suit or
prosecution.

205. False personation for purpose of act or proceeding in suit
or prosecution.--Whoever falsely personates another, and in such
assumed character makes any admission or statement, or confesses
judgment, or causes any process to be issued or becomes bail or
security, or does any other act in any suit or criminal prosecution,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.

206.

Fraudulent removal or concealment of property to prevent its seizure
as forfeited or in execution.

206. Fraudulent removal or concealment of property to prevent its
seizure as forfeited or in execution.--Whoever fraudulently removes,
conceals, transfers or delivers to any person any property or any
interest therein, intending thereby to prevent that property or
interest therein from being taken as a forfeiture or in satisfaction
of a fine, under a sentence which has been pronounced, or which he
knows to be likely to be pronounced, by a Court of Justice or other
competent authority, or from being taken in execution of a decree or
order which has been made, or which he knows to be likely to be made
by a Court of Justice in a civil suit, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two
years, or with fine, or with both.

207.

Fraudulent claim to property to prevent its seizure as forfeited or in
execution.

207. Fraudulent claim to property to prevent its seizure as
forfeited or in execution.--Whoever fraudulently accepts, receives or
claims any property or any interest therein, knowing that he has no
right or rightful claim to such property or interest, or practices any



deception touching any right to any property or any interest therein,
intending thereby to prevent that property or interest therein from
being taken as a forfeiture or in satisfaction of a fine, under a
sentence which has been pronounced, or which he knows to be likely to
be pronounced by a Court of Justice or other competent authority, or
from being taken in execution of a decree or order which has been
made, or which he knows to be likely to be made by a Court of Justice
in a civil suit, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or
with both.

1. Ins. by Act 3 of 1894, s. 7.

2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the States".
147

208.

Fraudulently suffering decree for sum not due.

208. Fraudulently suffering decree for sum not due.-——Whoever
fraudulently causes or suffers a decree or order to be passed against
him at the suit of any person for a sum not due or for a larger sum
than is due to such person or for any property or interest in property
to which such person is not entitled, or fraudulently causes. or
suffers a decree or order to be executed against him after it has been
satisfied, or for anything in respect of which it has been satisfied,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.

Illustration

A institutes a suit against Z. 2Z, knowing that A is likely to
obtain a decree against him, fraudulently suffers a judgment to pass
against him for a larger amount at the suit of B, who has no just
claim against him, in order that B, either on his own account or for
the benefit of Z, may share in the proceeds of any sale of Z's
property which may be made under A's decree. Z has committed an
offence under this section.

209.

Dishonestly making false claim in Court.

209. Dishonesty making false claim in Court .--Whoever
fraudulently or dishonestly, or with intent to injure or annoy any
person, makes in a Court of Justice any claim which he knows to be
false, sha be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to two years, and shall also be liable to fine.



210.

Fraudulently obtaining decree for sum not due.

210. Fraudulently obtaining decree for sum not due.--Whoever
fraudulently obtains a decree or order against any person for a sum
not due, or for a larger sum than is due or for any property or
interest in property to which he is not entitled, or fraudulently
causes a decree or order to be executed against any person after it
has been satisfied or for anything in respect of which it has been
satisfied, or fraudulently suffers or permits any such act to be done
in his name, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.

211.

False charge of offence made with intent to injure.

211. False charge of offence made with intent to injure.-—-—
Whoever, with intent to cause injury to any person, institutes or
causes to be instituted any criminal proceeding against that person,
or falsely charges any person with having committed an offence,

knowing that there is no just or lawful ground for such proceeding or
charge against that person, sha be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with
fine, or with both;

and if such criminal proceeding be instituted on a false charge
of an offence punishable with death 1*[imprisonment for life], or
imprisonment for seven years or upwards, shall be punishable with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.

212.

Harbouring offender-if a capital offence, if punishable with
imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment.

212. Harbouring offender .——-Whenever an offence has been
committed, whoever harbours or conceals a person whom he knows or has
reason to believe to be th offender, with the intention of screening
him from legal punishment,

if a capital offence;


if a capital offence;--shall, if the offence is punishable with
death, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine;

if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment.

if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment.-—-—
and if the offence is punishable with 1*[imprisonment for life], or
with imprisonment which may extend to ten years, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three years, and shall also be liable to fine;

and if the offence is punishable with imprisonment which may
extend to one year, and not to ten years, shall be punished with
imprisonment of the description provided for the offence for a term
which may extend to one-fourth part of the longest term of

imprisonment provided for the offence, or with fine, or with both.

1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for
life".

148
1*["Offence" in this section includes any act committed at any

place out of 2*[India], which, if committed in 2*[India], would be
punishable under any of the following sections, namely, 302, 304, 382,
392, 393, 394, 395, 396, 397, 398, 399, 402, 435, 436, 449, 450, 457,
458, 459 and 460; and every such act shall, for the purposes of this
section, be deemed to be punishable as if the accused person had been
guilty of it in 2* [India] .]

Exception.-This provision shall not extend to any case in which
the harbour or concealment is by the husband or wife of the offender.

Illustration

A, knowing that B has committed dacoity, knowingly conceals B in
order to screen him from legal punishment. Here, as B is liable to

3* [imprisonment for life], A is liable to imprisonment of either
description for a term not exceeding three years, and is also liable
to fine.

213.

Taking gift, etc., to screen an offender from punishment-if a capital
offence; if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with
imprisonment.

213. Taking gift, etc., to screen an offender from punishment——Whoever
accepts or attempts to obtain, or agrees to accept, any gratification


for himself or any other person, or any restitution of property to
himself or any other person, in consideration of his concealing an
offence or of his screening any person from legal punishment for any
offence, or of his not proceeding against any person for the purpose
of bringing him to legal punishment,

if a capital offence;

if a capital offence;-shall, if the offence is punishable with
death, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine;

if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment.

if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment.-—-—
and if the offence is punishable with 3*[imprisonment for life], or
with imprisonment which may extend to ten years, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three years, and shall also be liable to fine;

and if the offence is punishable with imprisonment not extending
to ten years, shall be punished with imprisonment of the description
provided for the offence for a term which may extend to. one fourth
part of the longest term of imprisonment provided for the offence, or
with fine, or with both.

214.

Offering gift or restoration of property in consideration of screening
offender-if a capital offence; if punishable with imprisonment for
life, or with imprisonment.

214. Offering gift or restoration of property in consideration of

screening offender.--Whoever gives or causes, or offers or agrees to
give or cause, any gratification to any person, or 4*[restores or
causes the restoration of] any property to any person, in
consideration of that person's concealing an offence, or of his

screening any person from legal punishment for any offence, or of his
not proceeding against any person for the purpose of bringing him to
legal punishment,

if a capital offence;

if a capital offence;-shall, if the offence is punishable with
death, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine;


if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment.

if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment.-—
and if the offence is punishable with 3%*[imprisonment for life] or
with imprisonment which may extend to ten years, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three years, and shall also be liable to fine;

1. Ins. by Act 3 of 1894, s. 7.

2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the States".

3. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for
life".

4. Subs. by Act 42 of 1953, s. 4 and the Third Sch., for "to restore

or cause the restoration of".

149

and if the offence is punishable with imprisonment not extending
to ten years, shall be punished with imprisonment of the description
provided for the offence for a term which may extend to one-fourth
part of the longest term of imprisonment provided for the offence, or
with fine, or with both.

1*[Exception.-The provisions of sections 213 and 214 do not
extend to any case in which the offence may lawfully be compounded. ]

Q* * * * *

215.

Taking gift to help to recover stolen property, etc.

215. Taking gift to help to recover stolen property, etc.-—-—
Whoever takes or agrees or consents to take any gratification under
pretence or on account of helping any person to recover any movable
property of which he shall hav been deprived by any offence
punishable under this Code, shall, unless he uses all means in his
power to cause the offender to be apprehended and convicted of the
offence, be punished with imprisonment of either description fora
term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.

216.

Harbouring offender who has escaped from custody or whose apprehension
has been ordered-if a capital offence; if punishable with
imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment.


216. Harbouring offender who has escaped from custody or whose
apprehension has been ordered.-—-Whenever any person convicted of or
charged with an offence, being in lawful custody for that offence,
escapes from such custody,

or whenever a public servant, in the exercise of the lawful
powers of such public servant, orders a certain person to be
apprehended for an offence, whoever, knowing of such escape or order
for apprehension, harbours or conceals that person with the intention
of preventing him from being apprehended, shall be punished in the

manner follow

ing,

that is to say,

if a capital offence;

if a capital offence;
custody or is ordered to be apprehended
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
and shall also be

which may extend to

if punishab

if the offenc

for which the person was in

e with death, he

seven years,

e with imprisonment for life,

if pun
if the offence is
imprisonment for

without fine;

and

extend to one year and not to

which may extend to
impr

4* ["Offence"

in this section incl

with

if the offence is punishable with

is punishab

for aterm
liable to fine;

or with imprisonment.

ishable with imprisonment for life,
punishable
ten years,

[e)

3* [imprisonment
he shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to three years,

r with imprisonment.-—

for life] or

imprisonment of the description provided for the

with or

imprisonment which may

ten years, he shall be punished with

offence for a term

one-fourth part of the longest term of the

is al

been

of which a person
which, if he
punishable

to extraditio
in custody in

ny

accused perso

Exception.-—The

the harbour or concealment

be apprehended.

216A.

had been guilty of
as an offence,
6*or otherwise 1]
5* [India],
the purposes of this section,
n had been guilty of it

eged to have
it in
and for which h
table to

W

be deemed

provision does

Penalty for harbouring robbers or dacoits.

e
be

to

Lsonment provided for such offence or with fine,

ludes also

guil

5* [India],

is,
ap

and every such act or

be

not extend to
is by the husband or wife of

or with both.

act or omission

of 5*[India],
have been
aw relating
or detained
shall, for
e as if the

any
ty

out
would
under any
prehended

omission
punishab

in 5* [India] .]

the case in which

the person to


7*[216A. Penalty for harbouring robbers or dacoits.-——-Whoever,
knowing or having reason to believe that any persons are about to
commit or have recently committed robbery or dacoity,

1. Subs. by Act 8 of 1882, s. 6, for the original Exception.

2. Tllustration rep. by Act 10 of 1882, s. 2 and Sch. I.

3. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for
life".

4. Ins. by Act 10 of 1886, s. 23.

5. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the States".

6. The words "or under the Fugitive Offenders Act, 1881" omitted by
s. 3 and Sch., ibid.

7. Ins. by Act 3 of 1894, s. 8.

150

harbours them or any of them, with the intention of facilitating the
commission of such robbery or dacoity or of screening them or any of
them from punishment, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for
a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to
fine.

Explanation.-For the purposes of this section it is immaterial
whether the robbery or dacoity is intended to be committed, or has
been committed, within or without 1*[India].

Exception.-This provision does not extend to the case in which
the harbour is by the husband or wife of the offender. ]

216B.

[Repealed. ]

2*[216B. Definition of "harbour" in sections 212, 216 and
216A.] Rep. by the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 1942 (8 of
1942), s. 3.

217.

Public servant disobeying direction of law with intent to save person
from punishment or property from forfeiture.

217. Public servant disobeying direction of law with intent to
save person from punishment or property from forfeiture.-——-Whoever,
being a public servant, knowingly disobeys any direction of the law as
to the way in which he is to conduct himself as such public servant,
intending thereby to save, or knowing it to be likely that he will
thereby save, any person from legal punishment, or subject him toa
less punishment than that to which he is liable, or with intent to



save, or knowing that he is likely thereby to save, any property from
forfeiture or any charge to which it is iable by law, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.

218.

Public servant framing incorrect record or writing with intent to save
person from punishment or property from forfeiture.

218. Public servant framing incorrect record or writing with
intent to save person from punishment or property from forfeiture.-—-
Whoever, being a public servant, and being as such public servant,
charged with the preparation of any record or other writing, frames
that record or writing in a manner which he knows to be incorrect,
with intent to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby
cause, loss or injury to the public or to any person, or with intent
t
a
t
fe)
i
t

hereby to save, or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby save,
ny person from legal punishment, or with intent to save, or knowing
hat he is likely thereby to save, any property from forfeiture or
ther charge to which it is liable by law, shall be punished with
mprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
hree years, or with fine, or with both.

219.

Public servant in judicial proceeding corruptly making report, etc.,
contrary to law.

219. Public servant in judicial proceeding corruptly making
report, etc., contrary to law.--Whoever, being a public servant,
corruptly or maliciously makes or pronounces in any stage of a
judicial proceeding, any report, order, verdict, or decision which he

knows to be contrary to law, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with
fine, or with both.

220.

Commitment for trial or confinement by person having authority who
knows that he is acting contrary to law.

220. Commitment for trial or confinement by person having
authority who knows that he is acting contrary to law.--Whoever, being
in any office which gives him lega authority to commit persons for
trial or to confinement, or to keep persons in confinement, corruptly
or maliciously commits any person for trial or to confinement, or
keeps any person in confinement, in the exercise of that authority,



knowing that in so doing he is acting contrary to law, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both.

221.

Intentional omission to apprehend on the part of public servant bound
to apprehend.

221. Intentional omission to apprehend on the part of public
servant bound to apprehend.--Whoever, being a pubic servant, legally
bound as such public servant to apprehend or to keep in confinement
any person charged with or liable to be apprehended for an offence,
intentionally omits to apprehend such person, or intentionally suffers
such person to escape, or intentionally aids such person in escaping
or attempting to escape from such confinement, shall be punished as
follows, that is to say:-

with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to seven years, with or without fine, if the person in
confinement, or who ought to have been apprehended, was charged with,
or liable to be apprehended for, an offence punishable with death; or

1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the States".
2. Ins. by Act 3 of 1894, s. 8.
151

with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, with or without fine, if the person in
confinement, or who ought to have been apprehended, was charged with,
or liable to be apprehended for, an offence punishable with

1*[imprisonment for life] or imprisonment for a term which may extend
to ten years; or

with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to two years, with or without fine, if the person in
confinement, or who ought to have been apprehended, was charged with,
or liable to be apprehended for, an offence punishable with

imprisonment for a term less than ten years.

222.

Intentional omission to apprehend on the part of public servant bound
to apprehend person under sentence or lawfully committed.

222. Intentional omission to apprehend on the part of public
servant bound to apprehend person under sentenc or lawfully
committed.--Whoever, being a public servant, legally bound as such



public servant to apprehend or to keep in confinement any person under

sentence of a Court of Justice for any offence 2*f[or awfully
committed to custody], intentionally omits to apprehend such person,
or intentionally suffers such person to escape or intentionally aids
such person in escaping or attempting to escape from such confinement,

shall be punished as follows, that is to say:-

with 1*[imprisonment for life or with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to fourteen years, with or
without fine, if the person in confinement, or who ought to have been
apprehended, is under sentence of death; or

with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to seven years, with or without fine, if the person in
confinement, or who, ought to have been apprehended, is subject, by a
sentence of a Court of Justice, or by virtue of a commutation of such
sentence, to 1*[imprisonment for life] Bx*xe  Akxe 5k¥KK Gk OK
imprisonment for a term of ten years or upwards; or

with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both, if the person in
confinement, or who ought to have been apprehended is subject, by a
sentence of a Court of Justice, to imprisonment for a term not
extending to ten years 2*for if the person was lawfully committed to
custody].

223.

Escape from confinement or custody negligently suffered by public
servant.

223. Escape from confinement or custody negligently suffered by
public servant.--Whoever, being a public servant legally bound as such
public servant to keep in confinement any person charged with or
convicted of any offence 2*[or lawfully committed to custody],
negligently suffers such person to escape from confinement, shall be
punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two
years, or with fine, or with both.

224.

Resistance or obstruction by a person to his lawful apprehension.

224. Resistance or obstruction by a person to his lawfu
apprehension.--Whoever intentionally offers any resistance or illega
obstruction to the lawful apprehension of himself for any offence with
which he is charged or of which he has been convicted, or escapes or
attempts to escape from any custody in which he is lawfully detained
for any such offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or
with both.



Explanation.-The punishment in this section is in addition to the
punishment for which the person to be apprehended or detained in
custody was liable for the offence with which he was charged, or of
which he was convicted.

1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for
life".

2. Ins. by Act 27 of 1870, s. 8.

3. The words "or penal servitude for life" omitted by Act 17 of
1949, s. 2.

4. The words "or to" omitted by Act 36 of 1957, s. 3 and Sch. II.

5. The word "transportation" omitted by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and

Sch.

6. The words "or penal servitude" omitted by Act 17 of 1949, s. 2.
152
225.

Resistance or obstruction to lawful apprehension of another person.

225.
person.
obstruction to the
offence, or rescues
custody in which that
shall be punished wit
whic

or, if the perso

atte
for an offence pu
imprisonment for a
punished with impriso
extend to three years

or, if the perso
be rescued,
punishable with death
description for a ter
be liable to fine;

or, if the perso
be rescued, is liabl
virtue of
life], 2***
upwards, shall
a term
fine;

a
B*x**

4

or,

h may extend to two years,

mpted to be rescued,

is charged

Resistance or obstruction to lawful appre
Whoever intentionally
lawful apprehension
or attempts to rescue

offers any
of a
a
person is lawfully de
h imprisonment of either

or with fine,

n to be apprehended, or
is charged with or
nishable with 1* [imp

hension of another
resistance or illegal
ny other person for an
ny other person from any
tained for an offence,
description for aterm

or with both;

the person rescued or
table to be apprehended

isonment for life] or

xr

term which may exten
nment of either descr

d to ten years, shall be

and shall also be liab

1,

ipti

on for a term which may
e to fine;

n to be apprehended or

with or liab to be a

rescued, or attempted to

shall be punished with
which may extend to se

,
m

n to be apprehended or r

commutation of

l be punished wi
which may extend to

if the person to be

the sentence of
such a sentence,
imprisonment, for
th imprisonment
seven years, and

under

KKK or

apprehended or r

pprehended for an offence
imprisonment of either
ven years, and shall also

escued, or attempted to
a Court of Justice, or by
to 1*[imprisonment for
a term of ten years or
of either description for
shall also be liable to
escued, or attempted to


be rescued, is under sentence
l[imprisonment for life]
term not exceeding ten years,

or imprisonment of

of death, shall

either

and shall also be

L be punished with
description for a
liable to fine.

225A.

Omission to apprehend, or sufferance
servant, in cases not otherwise,

of escape,
provided for.

on part of public

to
in

5*[225A. Omission apprehend, sufferance of scap
part of public servant, cases not otherwise, provided
Whoever, being a public servant legally bound as such public
to apprehend, or to keep in confinement, any person in any
provided for in section 221, section 222 or section 223, or
other law for the time being in force, omits to apprehend that
or suffers him to escape from confinement, shall be punished-

or

, on
for.--
servant
case not
in any
person

(a) if he does so intentionally,
description for a term which may extend to three years,
fine or with both; and

with imprisonment of either
or with

(b) if he does so negligently, with simple
a term which may extend to two years, or with fine,

imprisonment for
or with both.

225B.

Resistance or obstruction to lawful apprehension, or scape or rescu
in cases not otherwise provided for.
225B. Resistance or obstruction to lawful apprehension, or escape
or rescue in cases not otherwise provided for.--Whoever, in any case
not provided for in section 224 or section 225 or in any other law for
the time being in force, intentionally offers any resistance or
illegal obstruction to the lawful apprehension of himself or of any
other person, or escapes or attempts to escape from any custody in
which he is lawfully detained, or rescues or attempts to rescue any
other person from any custody in which that person is lawfully
detained, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with
both. ]
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for
life".
2. The words "or to" omitted by Act 36 of 1957, s. 3 and Sch. II.
3. The word "transportation" omitted by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and
Sch.
4. The words "penal servitude" rep. by Act 17 of 1949, s. 2.
5. Ss. 225A and 225B were subs. by Act 10 of 1886, s. 24(1), for s.
225A, which had been ins. by Act 27 of 1870, s.9.



153

226.

[Repealed. ]

226.
Criminal Procedur

[Unlawful return from transportation. ]
(Amendment) Act, 1955

227.

Violation of condition of remission of punishment.

227. Violation of condition of remission of puni
punishment,
violates any condition on which such remission was granted,

remission of

having accepted any conditional

Rep.
(26 of 1955),

by the Code of
s. 117 and Sch.

ishment.--Whoever,
knowingly
shall be

punished with the punishment to which he was origina
he has already suffered no part of that pun
suffered any part of that punishment, then
punishment as he has not already suffered.

with

228.

Intentional insult interruption to public

judicial proceeding.

or

228. Intentional insult or interruption to pub

ishment,

servant

ly sentenced, if
and if he has

so much of that

sitting in

1c servant sitting

in judicia
causes any

proceeding.--Whoever intentionally
interruption to any public servant,

whi

offers any insult,

or
LC

e such pub

servant is
punished wi
months, or
both.

sitting in any stage of a judicial
th s
W

228A.

Disclosure

1*[228A. Disclosure of identity of the
offences, te. (1)
which may make known the identity of any
offence under section 376, section 376A,
section 376D is alleged or found to have been

this section referred to as the victim) shall

person

be

proceeding,
imple imprisonment for a term which may
ith fine which may extend to one thousand rupees,

of identity of the victim of certain offences,
victim
Whoever prints or publishes the name or any matter

section 376B,
committed

shall
to
or w

be
six
ith

extend

etc.

of certain
against whom an
section 376C or

(hereafter in
punished with


imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two
years and shall also be liable to fine.

(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) extends to any printing or
publication of the name or any matter which may make known the
identity of the victim if such printing or publication is-—

(a)

by or under the order
charge of the police station or the police officer

in

investigation into such offence actin

purposes of such

(b) by,

or

(c)
by,

investigation;

or with the authorisati

or with the authorisation

or

[e)

writing

of the officer-i
making t

faith for t

g in good

n in writing of, the victim;

where the victim is dead or minor or of

in wri

unsound mind,

ting of, the next-of-kin of

the victim:

Provided that no such authorisation

of-kin to anybody other
whatever name called, of any
organisation.

Exp
welfare institution
institution or organisation
or State Government.

(3)

sub-section without the

(1)

than

anation.-For the purposes of
or organisation"

the chai
recognised

thi
m

recognised in

Whoever prints or pub
proceeding before a court with respect to an offenc
prev

ishes any

lous permi

shall
rman
we

be given by the next-—
or the secretary, by
lfare institution or

s sub-section, "recognised
eans a social welfare
this behalf by the Central

matter in relation to any
referred to in

ssion of such court shall be

punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to two years and shall also be liable to fine.

Explanation.-The printing or publication of the judgment of any
High Court or the Supreme Court does not amount to an offence within
the meaning of this section. ]

229.
Personation of a juror or assessor.

229. Personation of a juror or assessor.--Whoever, by personation
or otherwise, sha intentionally cause, or knowingly suffer himself
to be returned, empanelled or sworn as a juryman or assessor in any
case in which he knows that he is not entitled by law to be so
returned, empan d or sworn, or knowing himself to have been so
returned, empan d or sworn contrary to law, shall voluntarily serve
on such jury or as such assessor, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or
with fine, or with both.

1. Ins. by Act 43 of 1983, s. 2 (w.e.f. 25-12-1983).



154

7

CHAPTER XII

OF OFFENCES RELATING TO COIN AND GOVERNMENT STAMPS

CHAPTER XII

OF OFFENCES RELATING TO COIN AND GOVERNMENT STAMPS

230.

"Coin" defined.

230. "Coin" defined.--1* [Coin is metal used for the time being
as money, and stamped and issued by the authority of some State or
Sovereign Power in order to be so used. ]

Indian coin

Indian coin--2* [Indian coin is metal stamped and issued by the
authority of the Government of India in order to be used as money; and
metal which has been so stamped and issued shall continue to be Indian
coin for the purposes of this Chapter, notwithstanding that it may
have ceased to be used as money. ]

Illustrations
(a) Cowries are not coin.

(b) Lumps of unstamped copper, though used as money, are not
coin.

(c) Medals are not coin, inasmuch as they are not intended to be
used as money.

(d) The coin denominated as the Company's rupee is 3[Indian
coin].

4*(e)The "Farukhabad rupee", which was formerly used as

money under the authority of the Government of India, is
3[Indian coin] although it is no longer so used. ]

231.


Counterfeiting coin.

231. Counterfeiting coi
performs any part of the process of
punis
extend to seven years,

and shall

practise deception, or knowi
thereby be practised,
coin.

ng

232.
Counterfeiting Indian coin.

232. Counterfeiting Indian
knowingly performs any part of
3* [Indian coin], shall be punished
or with impr

to ten years,

and shall a

233.

Making or sell

233. Making or sel
Whoever makes or mends,
or mending, or buys, se
the purpose of being used,
it is intended to be used,
shall be punished with imprisonment
which may extended to three years,

or performs

234.

Making or sell

n.—--Whoever

hed with imprisonment of either descri

Explanation.-A person commits this

coin.--Whoever

ing instrument

s or disposes of,

and shall also

counterfeits or knowingly
counterfeiting coin, shall be
ption for a term which may

also be liable to fine.
offence who intending to
it to be likely that deception will

causes a genuine coin to appear like a different

counterfeits, or
the process of counterfeiting
with 5*[imprisonment for life],

Lsonment of either description for a term which may extend
so be liabl

le to fine.

ling instrument for counterfeiting coin.

for counterfeiting coin.--
any part of the process of making
any die or instrument, for

or knowing or having reason to believe that
for the purpose

of counterfe
description

be liab

iting coin,
for a term
e to fine.

of either

ling instrument for counterfeiting Indian coin.

234. Making or selling instrument for counterfeiting Indian
coin.--Whoever makes or mends, or performs any part of the process of
making or mending or buys, sells or disposes of, any die or

instrument,
to believe that it is intended

for the purpose of being used,

or knowing or having reason
to be used, for the purpose of

counterfeiting 3[Indian coin], shall
either description for a term which
shall also be liable to fine.

l be punished with imprisonment of
may extend to seven years, and


1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1872, s. 1, for the original paragraph.

2. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for the former paragraph.

3. Subs., ibid., for "the Queen's coin".

4. Ins. by Act 6 of 1896, s. 1(2).

5. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for
life".

155

235.

Possession of instrument or material for the purpose of using the
same for counterfeiting coin.

235. Possession of instrument or material for the purpose of
using the same for counterfeiting coin.--Whoever is in possession of
any instrument or material, for the purpose of using the same for
counterfeiting coin, or knowing or having reason to believe that the

same is intended to be used for that purpose, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three years, and shall also be liable to fine;

if Indian coin.

if Indian coin.--and if the coin to be counterfeited is
1*[Indian coin], shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also
be liable to fine.

236.

Abetting in India the counterfeiting out of India of coin.

236. Abetting in India the counterfeiting out of India of coin.--
Whoever, being within 2* [India] abets the counterfeiting of coin
out of 2*[India] shall be punished in the same manner as if he abetted
the counterfeiting of such coin within 2*[India].

237.

Import or export of counterfeit coin.

237. Import or export of counterfeit coin.--Whoever imports into
2*[India], or exports therefrom, any counterfeit coin, knowingly or


having reason to believe that the

pun
extend to

238.

ished with imprisonment of either descr
also be ]

three years, and shall

be
may

is counterfeit, shall
iption for a term which
table to fine.

same

Import or export of counterfeits of the Indian coin.

238.
Whoever

counterfei

Import or export of
imports into

t coin, which he knows

counterfei
3* [Imprisonment for
for a term which may extend to ten years,

fine.

239.

Delivery of coin possessed with knowledge that it

239.

t of 1* [Indian co
life],

Delivery of coin

counterfeit.

when he became
fraudulently or with
same to any persons or attempts to induce
shall be punished with imprisonment of either

Whoever,
possessed

counterfeits
2* [India],
or has
in],
or with imprisonment of

possessed
having any counterfeit coin,
of it,
intent that fraud may be committed,

of the Indian coin.--
exports therefrom, any

reason to believe to be a
shall be punished with
either description
also be liable to

or

and shall

is counterfeit.

with knowledge that it is
which at the time

be counterfeit,
delivers th
receive it,

for a term

he knew to

any person to
description

which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine.
240.

Delivery of Indian coin, possessed with knowledge that it is
counterfeit.

240. Delivery of Indian coin, possessed with knowledge that it is
counterfeit.--Whoever having any counterfeit coin, which is a
counterfeit of 1*[Indian coin], and which, at the time when he becam
possessed of it, he knew to be a counterfeit of 1*[Indian coin],
fraudulently or with intent that fraud may be committed, delivers th

same to any person,
shall be punished with imprisonment of
and shall also be liable to fine.

which may

241.

De
de

ivery

or attempts

extend to ten years,

of coin as genuine,

to induce any person to receive it,

either description for a term

which, when first possessed, the

iverer did not know to be counterfeit.


241. Delivery of coin as genuine, which, w

hen first possessed,

the deliverer did not know to be counterfeit.--Who

other person as genuine, or attempts to induce
receive as genuine, any counterfeit coin whic
counterfeit, but which he did not know to be cou
when he took it into his possession, sha

ver delivers to any
any other person to
h he knows to be
nterfeit at the time

be punished with

imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two

years, or with fine to an amount which may exte
value of the coin counterfeited, or with both.

nd to ten times the

1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for "the Queen's coin".

2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951 s. 3 and Sch., for "the States".

3. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for
life".

156

Illustration

A, a coiner, delivers counterfeit Company's rupees to his
accomplice B, for the purpose of uttering them. B sells the rupees to

C, another utterer, who buys them knowing them
pays away the rupees for goods to D, who receives

to be counterfeit. C

them, not knowing

them to be counterfeit. D, after receiving the rupees, discovers that
they are counterfeit and pays them away as if they were good. Here D
is punishable only under this section, but B andcC are punishable

under section 239 or 240, as the case may be.

242.

Possession of counterfeit coin by person who knew it to be counterfeit

when he became possessed thereof.

242. Possession of counterfeit coin by person

who knew it to be

counterfeit when he became possessed thereof.-——Who
or with intent that fraud may be committed,

ver, fraudulently
is in possession of

counterfeit coin, having known at th tim when
thereof that such coin was counterfeit, shall
imprisonment of either description for a term
three years, and shall also be liable to fine.

243.

Possession of Indian coin by person who knew it to
he became possessed thereof.

he became possessed
be punished with
which may extend to

be counterfeit when


243. Possession of Indian coin by person who knew it to be

counterfeit when h becam possessed thereof.--Whoever, fraudulently
or with intent that fraud may be committed, is in possession of
counterfeit coin, which is a counterfeit of 1*[Indian coin], having
known at the time when he becam possessed of it that it was
counterfeit, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable
to fine.

244,

Person employed in mint causing coin to be of different weight or
composition from that fixed by law.

244. Person employed in mint causing coin to be of different
weight or composition from that fixed by law.--Whoever, being employed
in any mint lawfully established in 2*[India], does any act, or omits
what he is legally bound to do, with the intention of causing any coin
issued from that mint to be of a different weight or composition from
the weight or composition fixed by law, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.

245.

Unlawfully taking coining instrument from mint.

245. Unlawfully taking coining instrument from mint.--Whoever,
without lawful authority, takes out of any mint, lawfully established
in 2[India], any coining tool or instrument, sha be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.

246.

Fraudulently or dishonestly diminishing weight or altering composition
of coin.

246. Fraudulently or dishonestly diminishing weight or altering
composition of coin.--Whoever, fraudulently or dishonestly performs on
any coin any operation which diminishes the weight or alters the
composition of that coin, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to three years, and
shall also be liable to fine.

Explanation.-A person who scoops out part of the coin and puts
anything else into the cavity alters the composition of the coin.



247.

Fraudulently or dishonestly diminishing weight or altering composition

of Indian

247.

coin.

Fraudulently or dishonestly diminishing we
coin.--Whoever

composition of

performs on 3*[any Indian coin]
weight or alters the composi

Indian

imprisonment of either descr

seven years,

and shall also be

a
tion
ipt:

on

ny

of that coin,

fraudu
operatio

for a te

liable to fine.

lently
n whi
sha

wh

rm ich

ight
or

or

may extend

alteri

ing

dishonestly
ich diminishes the
be punished with

to

1.

Subs.

Subs.

Subs.

by the A. O.

by the A. O.

1950

by Act 3 of 1951,

1950

, for

Ss.

, for

"the Queen's coin".

3 and Sch.,

fo

xr

"the States".

"any of the Queen's coin".

157

248.

248.

operation

that the sai

Alter

wh

of that

shall be punished with

which may extend to three years,

249,

Altering appearance of Indian coin with intent that it shall

appearanc
pass as a coin
imprisonment of either description
and shall als

of a

coin of different description.

ltering appearance of coin with intent that it shall pass
ifferent description.

ing appearance of coin with intent that it
as coin of different description.-——-Whoever performs
ich alters th
d coin shal

on
coin,

as coin

shall
any coin

of

pass
any
with the intention

different description,

o be

for

pass

a term
liable to fine.

as

249. Altering appearance of Indian coin with intent that it shall
pass as coin of

Indian co
with the
d

in]

intent

ton that

ifferent description,

different
any operation

the
shall

description.-—-Whoever performs
which alters the appearanc
said coin. shall
be

pass as a coin

on

1* [any

of that coin,

of

a

punished with imprisonment of either

description for a term which may extend to seven years,
be liable to fine.

and shall al

LSO


250.

Delivery of coin possessed with knowledge that it

250.

Delivery of

coin pos

altered.
the offenc

W

hoever,
defined in section 246

sessed

having know

with intent
other perso
same, shall
term which

251.

Delivery of Indian coin,

251.
altered.

ny

nat th
such offence had been committed with
that fraud may be committed, delivers
induce any
isonment of
and shal

be punished with
may extend to five years,

or

time when h

or attempts to

impr

becam

Delivery of Indian coin,

W
the offenc

hoever,
defined in section

having coin

having know

with intent
other perso
same, shall
term which

252.

ny

nat th
such offence had been committed with
that fraud may be committed, de
induce any other
isonment of
and sha

be punished with
may extend to ten years,

time when h

247 or 2
becam

or attempts to

imp

xr

with knowledge
having coin in his possession with respect to which
committed,
of such coin that

fraudul
in
to receive the

24

8

possessed
respect

has

t

other

49

h

possessed
respect

eit

ll also be liabl

as

t

ivers

Pp
eit
al

Possession of coin by person who knew it to b
possessed thereof.

252.

he becam

the offenc

possess
fraud may be committed,
defined in

d thereof.

ither of

committed having known at the time of
such offence had been committed

the

with

punished with imprisonment of either descr

extend to three years,

253.

Possession of Indian coin by person who knew it to b

and shall

becam

possessed thereof.

also be

]

is altered.

been

it,
such

person

her

[e)
co

been

it,
such
to

[e)
erson

her
so be

ltered

that

it

lently
to

lently
to

is

and

or
any

description for a
le to fine.

possessed with knowledge that it is altered.

possessed with knowledge that it is
in his possession with respect to which

committed,
of such coin that
fraudul
coin
receive the
description for a

liable to fine.

and

or
any

when he becam

a

Possession of coin by person who knew
Whoever fraudu

ent

it to b

ltered w

a

y or with

sections 246
becoming possessed thereof t
respect

t

Lab

iption fora

e

or 248

o such coin,

to fine.

intent t

hen
hat

is in possession of coin with respect to which

has been

shall

term which

hat
be
may

altered when h



253. Possession of Indian coin

by person
Whoever

who knew it to be

a
W

ltered when he becam possessed thereof.

fraudulently or

ith intent that fraud may be committed, is
respect to which the offence defined in eith

in possession of coin with
r of the sections 247 or

249 has been committed having known at the ti
thereof, that such offence had been commi
coin, shall be punished with imprisonment
term which may extend to five years, and shal

254.

Delivery of coin as genuine which,
did not know to be altered.

254. Delivery of coin as genuine which,
deliverer did not know to be altered.-——Whoev

tted
of either description for a

when first possessed,

ime of becoming possessed
with respect to such

ll also be liable to fine.

the deliverer

when first possessed, the

r delivers to any other

person as genuine or as a coin of a different description from what it

is,
different coin from what it is, any coin in
that any such operation as that mentioned in
249 has been performed, but in respect of
time when he took it into his possession,
been performed, shall be punished with

or attempts to induce any person to receive

which he
know that such operation had

as genuine, or asa
respect of which he knows
sections 246, 247, 248 or
did not, at the
of

imprisonment either

description for a term which may extend to two

1. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for

"any of the Queen's coin".

158

years or with fine to an amount which may
value of the coin for which the altered coin
to be passed.

255.

Counterfeiting Government stamp.

255. Counterfeiting Government
knowingly performs any part of the
stamp issued by Government for the
punished with 1*[imprisonment for life]

also be liable to fine.
Explanation.-A person commits this
causing a genuine stamps of one denomination

stamp of a different denomination.

extend

stamp.--Whoever counterfeits,
process
purpose
or

either description for a term which may extend to ten years,

offence

times the
attempted

to
is passed,

ten
or

or
of counterfeiting, any
of revenue shall _ be
with imprisonment of

and shall

who counterfeits by
to appear like a genuine


256.

Having possession of instrument or material for counterfeiting
Government stamp.

256. Having possession of instrument or material for
counterfeiting Government stamp.——Whoever has in his possession any
instrument or material for the purpose of being used, or knowing or
having reason to believe that it is intended to be used, for the
purpose of counterfeiting any stamp issued by Government for the
purpose of revenue, shall be punished with imprisonment of either

description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also
be liable to fine.

257.

Making or selling instrument for counterfeiting Government stamp.

257. Making or selling instrument for counterfeiting Government
stamp.--Whoever makes or performs any part of the process of making,
or buys, or sells, or disposes of, any instrument for the purpose of
being used, or knowing or having reason to believe that it is intended
to be used, for the purpose of counterfeiting any stamp issued by
Government for the purpose of revenue, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.

258.

Sale of counterfeit Government stamp.

258. Sale of counterfeit Government stamp.--Whoever s S, or
offers for sale, any stamp which he knows or has reason to believe to
be a counterfeit of any stamp issued by Government for the purpose of
revenue, sha be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to
fine.

259.

Having possession of counterfeit Government stamp.

259. Having possession of counterfeit Government stamp.-—-Whoever
has in his possession any stamp which he knows to be a counterfeit of
any stamp issued by Government for the purpose of revenue, intending
to use, or dispose of the same as a genuine stamp, or in order that it



may be used as a genuine stamp, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and
shall also be liable to fine.

260.

Using as genuine a Government stamp known to be counterfeit.

260. Using as genuine a Government stamp known to be
counterfeit.—--Whoever uses as genuine any stamp, knowing it to bea
counterfeit of any stamp issued by Government for the purpose of
revenue, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both.

261.

Effacing writing from substance bearing Government stamp, or removing
from document a stamp used for it, with intent to cause loss to
Government.

261. Effacing writing from substance bearing Government stamp, or
removing from document a stamp used for it, with intent to cause loss
to Government.--Whoever, fraudulently or with intent to cause loss to
the Government, removes or effaces from any substance, bearing any
stamp issued by Government for the purpose of revenue, any writing or
document for which such stamp has been used, or removes from any
writing or document a stamp which has been used for such writing or
document, in order that such stamp may be used for a different writing
or document, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description

for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with

both.

1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for
life".

159

262.

Using Government stamp known to have been before used.

262. Using Government stamp known to hav been before used.
Whoever, fraudulently or with intent to cause loss to the Government,
uses for any purpose a stamp issued by Government for the purpose of
revenue, which he knows to have been befor used, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
two years, or with fine, or with both.



263.

Erasure of mark denoting that stamp has been used.

263. Erasure of mark denoting that stamp has been used.-——Whoever,

fraudulently or with intent to cause loss to Government, rases or
removes from a stamp issued by Government for the purpose of revenue,
any mark, put or impressed upon such stamp for the purpose of denoting

that the same has been used, or knowingly has in his possession or
sells or disposes of any such stamp from which such mark has been
erased or removed, or sells or disposes of any such stamp which he
knows to have been used, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine,
or with both.

263A.

Prohibition of fictitious stamps.

1*[263A. Prohibition of fictitious stamps.--(1) Whoever-
(a) makes, knowingly utters, deals in or sells any
fictitious stamp, or knowingly uses for any postal purpose any

fictitious stamp, or

(ob) has in his possession, without lawful excuse, any
fictitious stamp, or

(c) makes or, without lawful excuse, has in his possession
any die, plate, instrument or materials for making any fictitious
stamp,

shall be punished with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees.

(2) Any such stamp, die, plate, instrument or materials in the

possession of any person for making any fictitious stamp 2*[may be
seized and, if seized] sha be forfeited.

(3) In this section "fictitious stamp" means any stamp falsely

purporting to be issued by Government for the purpose of denoting a
rate of postage, or any facsimile or imitation or representation,

whether on paper or otherwise, of any stamp issued by Government for

that purpose.

inc

(4) In this section and also in sections 255 to 263, both
usive, the word "Government", when used in connection with, or in

inc

reference to, any stamp issued for the purpose of denoting a rate of
postage, shall, notwithstanding anything in section 17, be deemed to

ude the person or persons authorized by law to administer

xecutive Government in any part of India, and also in any part of Her



Majesty's dominions or in any foreign country. ]

7

CHAPTER XIII

OF OFFENCES RELATING TO WEIGHTS AND MEASURES

CHAPTER XIII

OF OFFENCES RELATING TO WEIGHTS AND MEASURES

264,

Fraudulent use of false instrument for weighing.

264. Fraudulent use of false instrument for weighing.-—-Whoever,
fraudulently uses any instrument for weighing which he knows to be
false, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.

265.

Fraudulent use of false weight or measure.

265. Fraudulent use of false weight or measure.——Whoever,
fraudulently uses any false weight or false measure of length or
capacity, or fraudulently uses any weight or any measure of length or
capacity as a different weight or measure from what it is, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.

1. S. 263A ins. by Act 3 of 1895, s. 2.

2. Subs. by Act 42 of 1953, s. 4 and the Third Sch., for "may be
seized and".

160

266.

Being in possession of false weight or measure.

266. Being in possession of false weight or measure.--Whoever is
in possession of any instrument for weighing, or of any weight, or of
any measure of length or capacity, which he knows to be false, 1****



intending that the same may be fraudulently used, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
one year, or with fine, or with both.

267.

Making or selling false weight or measure.

267. Making or selling false weight or measure.-—-Whoever makes,
sells or disposes of any instrument for weighing, or any weight, or
any measure of length or capacity which he knows to be false, in order
that the same may be used as true, or knowing that the same is likely
to be used as true, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or
with both.

7

CHAPTER XIV

OF OFFENCES AFFECTING THE PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, CONVENIENCE, DECENCY
AND MORALS

CHAPTER XIV

OF OFFENCES AFFECTING THE PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, CONVENIENCE, DECENCY
AND MORALS

268.

Public nuisance.

268. Public nuisance.--A person is guilty of a public nuisance
who does any act or is guilty of an illegal omission which causes any
common injury, danger or annoyance to the public or to the people in

general who dwell or occupy property in the vicinity, or which must
necessarily cause injury, obstruction, danger or annoyance to persons
who may have occasion to use any public right.

A common nuisance is not excused on the ground that it causes
some convenience or advantage.

269.

Negligent act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to
life.


269. Negligent act likely to spread infection of disease
dangerous to life.--Whoever unlawfully or negligently does any act
which is, and which he knows or has reason to believe to be, likely to
spread the infection of any disease dangerous to life, sha be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.

270.
Malignant act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to
life.

270. Malignant act likely to spread infection of disease
dangerous to life.--Whoever malignantly does any act which is, and
which he knows or has reason to believe to be, likely to spread the
infection of any disease dangerous to life, sha be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two

years, or with fine, or with both.

271.

Disobedience to quarantine rule.

271. Disobedience to quarantine rule.--Whoever knowingly disobeys
any rul e made and promulgated 2*[by the 3* Government 4*] for
putting any vessel into a state of quarantine, or for regulating the

intercourse of vessels in a state of quarantine with the shore or with
other vessels, for regulating the intercourse between places where an
infectious disease prevails and other places, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six
months, or with fine, or with both.

272.

Adulteration of food or drink intended for sale.

272. Adulteration of food or drink intended for sale.-Whoever
adulterates any article of food or drink, so as to make such article
noxious as food or drink, intending to sell such article as food or
drink, or knowing it to be likely that the same will be sold as food
or drink, sha be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.

273.


Sale of noxious food or drink.

273. Sale of noxious food or drink.--Whoever sells, or offers or
exposes for sale, as food or drink, any article which has been
rendered or has become noxious, or is in a state unfit for food

1. The word "and" omitted by Act 42 of 1953, s. 4 and the third Sch.

2. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for "by the G. of I., or by any Govt.".

3. The words "Central or any Provincial" rep. by the A. O. 1950.

4, The words "or the Crown Representative" were rep. by the A. O.
1948.

161

or drink, knowing or having reason to believe that the same is noxious
as food or drink, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine
which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.

274.

Adulteration of drugs.

274. Adulteration of drugs.--Whoever adulterates any drug or
medical preparation in such a manner as to lessen the efficacy or
change the operation of such drug or medical preparation, or to make
it noxious, intending that it shall be sold or used for, or knowing it

to be likely that it will be sold or used for, any medicinal purpose,
as it had not undergone such adulteration, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six

months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with
both.

275.

Sale of adulterated drugs.

275. Sale of adulterated drugs.--Whoever, knowing any drug or
medical preparation to have been adulterated in such a manner as to
lessen its efficacy, to change its operation, or to render it noxious,
sells the same, or offers or exposes it for sale, or issues it from
any dispensary for medicinal purposes as unadulterated, or causes it
to be used for medicinal purposes by any person not knowing of the
adulteration, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine
which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.



276.

Sale of drug as a different drug or preparation.

276. Sale of drug as a different dr
knowingly sells, or offers or exposes for sale, or issues
ug or medical preparation, as

dispensary for medicinal

1 purposes, any dr

a different drug or medical preparatio
imprisonment of either description for a term which may
months, or with fine which may extend to

both.

277.

ug or preparation.—-—-Whoever

n, shall be

Fouling water of public spring or reservoir.

277. Fouling water of public sp

voluntarily corrupts or

fouls the water

reservoir, so as to render it less fit fo

ordinarily used, shall

278.

be punished

Making atmosphere noxious to health.

278. Making atmosphere noxious to
in any place so as to make it noxious to the

Ltiates the atmosphere

279.

eighbourhood or passing along a public
ine which may extend to five hundred rupees.

Rash driving or riding on a public way.

279. Rash driving or riding on a publ

vehicle, or rides, on any public way ina

as to endanger human life,

any other person, sha

be punished Ww

description for a term which may extend

which may extend to one

thousand rupees,

from a

punished with
extend to six
one thousand rupees, or with

ring or reservoir.—-—Whoever

of any public

spring or

r the purpose for which it is
with imprisonment
description for a term which may extend to three months,
which may extend to five hundred rupees,

or with both.

or

of either
with fine

health.—--Whoever voluntarily

way, shall be punished with

manner so rash

to six months,
or with both.

Vv
health of persons in general dwelling or carrying on business in the
n
f

lic way.—-—-Whoever

or

or to be likely to cause hurt or
Lth imprisonment

[e)

drives any
negligent
injury to
of either
r with fine



280.
Rash navigatio

280. Rash
manner so ra
ikely to caus
Lx months,

a
1
W
s] or
with both.

281.

Exhibition of

281. Exhi

n of vessel.

Who
to
ot

navigation of vessel.
sh or negligent as
e hurt or injury to any

with fine which may exten

false light, mark or buoy.

bition of false light, mark

any false ligh
that such exhi

mark or buoy, intendi
ion will mislead any n

t,
bit

with imprisonm
seven years, oO

162

282.

Conveying person by water for hire in unsafe or overloaded vess

282. Conv

ent
row

of either description f
ith fine, or with both.

eying person by water for

vessel .-——-Whoev
conveyed for h
is in suchas
person,
a term which m
to one thousan

283.

Danger or obst

283. Dang
Whoever, by do
property in h
obstruction or
of navigation,

r knowingly or negligent]
ire, any person by water
tate or so loaded as toe

Ly
in

shall be punished with imprisonment

ay extend to six months, or

d rupees, or with both.

ruction in public way or li

er or obstruction in public
ing any act, or by omitti
is possession or under
injury to any person in

shall be punished, with fi

hundred rupees.

ver navigates any vessel in
endanger human life, or to be
her person, sha be punished

ith imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to

d to one thousand rupees, or

or buoy.--Whoever exhibits
ng or knowing it to be likely
avigator, shall be punished

or a term which may extend to

hire in unsafe or overloaded
conveys, or causes to be
any vessel, when that vessel
ndanger the life of that
of either description for
with fine which may extend

ne of navigation.

way or line of navigation.-——-
ng to take order with any
his charge, causes danger,
any public way or public line
ne which may extend to two



284,

Negligent conduct with respect to poisonous substance.

284. Negligent conduct with respect to poisonous substance.-—-
Whoever does, with any poisonous substance, any act in amanner so
rash or negligent as to endanger human life, or to be likely to cause
hurt or injury to any person,

or knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with any
poisonous substance in his possession as is sufficient to guard
against probable danger to human life from such poisonous substance,

shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to
one thousand rupees, or with both.

285.

Negligent conduct with respect to fire or combustible matter.

285. Negligent conduct with respect to fire or combustible
matter.--Whoever does, with fire or any combustible matter, any act so
rashly or negligently as to endanger human life, or to be likely to
cause hurt or injury to any other person,

or knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with any
fire or any combustible matter in his possession as is sufficient to
guard against any probable danger to human life from such fire or
combustible matter,

shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to
one thousand rupees, or with both.

286.

Negligent conduct with respect to explosive substance.

286. Negligent conduct with respect to explosive substance.-—-
Whoever does, with any explosive substance, any act so rashly or
negligently as to endanger human life, or to be likely to cause hurt
or injury to any other person,

or knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with any

explosive substance in his possession as is sufficient to guard
against any probable danger to human life from that substance,



shall be punished with impr
term which may extend to six mon
one thousand rupees, or with bot

287.

Negligent conduct with respect t

287. Negligent conduct with
with any machinery, any act so r
human life or to be likely to
person,

or knowingly or negligently

isonment of
ths, or with f
h.

o machinery.-——

either description for a
ine which may extend to

respect to machinery.--Whoever does,

ashly or negl
cause hurt

omits to t

machinery in his possession or

under his c

igently as to endanger
or injury to any other

ake such order with any
are as is sufficient to

guard against any probable danger to human life from such machinery,

shall be punished with impr
term which may extend to six mon
one thousand rupees, or with bot

163

288.

isonment of e
ths, or with
h.

ither description for a
fine which may extend to

Negligent conduct with respect to pulling down or repairing

buildings.

288. Negligent conduct with respect to pulling down or repairing

buildings.-——-Whoever, in pulling

down or rx

epairing any building,

knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with that building
as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to human life

from the fa of that building,

or of any p

art thereof, sha be

punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may

extend to six months, or with fi
rupees, or with both.

289.

Negligent conduct with respect t

ne which may

© animal.

extend to one thousand

289. Negligent conduct with respect to animal.--Whoever knowingly

or negligently omits to take
possession as is sufficient to
human life, or any probable dang
shall be punished with imprisonm
which may extend to six months,

such order w
guard against
er of grievous
ent of either
or with fine

ith any animal in his
any probable danger to
hurt from such animal,
description for a term
which may extend to one



thousand rupees, or with both.

290.

Punishment for public nuisance in cases not otherwise provided for.
290. Punishment for public nuisance in cases not otherwise

provided for.-Whoever commits a public nuisance in any case not

otherwise punishable by this Code, shall be punished with fine which

may extend to two hundred rupees.

291.

Continuance of nuisance after injunction to discontinue.

291.

Continuance of nuisance after

injunction

Whoever repeats or continues a
by any public servant who has
injunction not

with fine, or with both.

292.

Sale, etc., of obscene books, etc.

1*[292. Sale, etc., of
purposes of sub-section (2),
drawing, painting representation,

lawful
to repeat or continue such nuisance,
with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months,

obscene
a book,

figure or any other object,

public nuisance,

hav

authority

books
Pp

deemed to be obscene if it is
interest or if its effect, or
items)

(where
the effect of any one of its

such as to tend to deprave and corrupt

regard to all relevant circumstances,

contained or

mbodied in it.]

to read,

, etc.--
amphlet,

lascivious or appeals to the
it comprises two or more
items,
persons who are likely,

is, if t

to discontinue.--
ing been enjoined
to issue such
shall be punished
or

2*[(1)
paper,

the
ng,

be
prurient
distinct
a whole,
having

For
writi
shall

aken as

Ss [e)

r hear the matter

3*[(2)]

(a)

in any manner puts

hire, d

reduces

Whoever-

sells, lets to hire, distr

tbutes, publicly exhibits or

into circulation
public exh

istribution,

Lbiti

or
on or

for purposes of sale,
circulation, makes,

1,

or has in his i

paper, drawing,

(b)

that such object

imports,
of the purposes aforesaid,
be

pa

inting,
obscene object whatsoever,

will

possession

or

sold,

exports or conveys
or knowing or having reason to believe
let

any

any

to

obscene book, pamphlet,

representation or figure or any other

obscene object for any

hire, distributed or


publicly exhibited or in any manner put into circulation, or

(c) takes part in or receives profits from any business in
the course of which he knows or has reason to believe that any
such obscene objects are, for any of the purposes aforesaid,
made, produced, purchased, kept, imported, exported, conveyed,
publicly exhibited or in any manner put into circulation, or

(d) advertises or makes known by any means whatsoever that
any person is engaged or is ready to engage in any act which is
an offence under this section, or that any such obscene object
can be procured from or through any person, or

1. Subs. by Act 8 of 1925, s. 2, for the original s. 292.
2. Ins. by Act 36 of 1969, s. 2
3. S. 292 renumbered as sub-section (2) thereof by s. 2, ibid.
164
(e) offers or attempts to do any act which is an offence
under this section,
shall be punished 1 [on first conviction with imprisonment of either

description for aterm which may extend to two years, and with fine
which may extend to two thousand rupees, and, in the event of a second
or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to five years, and also with fine which may
extend to five thousand rupees].

2*[Exception-This section does not extend to-

(a) any book, pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing, painting,
representation or figure-

(i) the publication of which is proved to be justified
as being for the public good on the ground that such book,
pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing, painting, representation
or figure is in the interest of science, literature, art or
learning or other objects of general concern, or

(ii) which is kept or used bona fide for religious
purposes;

(b) any representation sculptured, engraved, painted or
otherwise represented on or in-

(i) any ancient monument within the meaning of the
Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act,
1958 (24 of 1958), or

(ii) any temple, or on any car used for the conveyance
of idols, or kept or used for any religious purpose.]]



293.

Sale, etc., of obscene objects to young person.

3*[293. Sale, etc., of obscene objects to young person.--
Whoever sells, lets to hire, distributes, exhibits or circulates to
any person under the age of twenty years any such obscene object as is
referred to in the last preceding section, or offers or attempts so to
do, shall be punished lfon first conviction with imprisonment of
tther description for a term which may extend to three years, and

el
with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, and, in the event
of a second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment of either
d
£

escription for a term which may extend to seven years, and also with
ine which may extend to five thousand rupees].]

294,

Obscene acts and songs.

4*[294. Obscene acts and songs.--Whoever, to the annoyance of

others,

(a) does any obscene act in any public place, or

(b) sings, recites or utters any obscene song, ballad or
words, in or near any public place,

shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term

which may extend to three months, or with fine, or with both.]
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1969, s. 2, for certain words.

2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for Exception.

3. Subs. by Act 8 of 1925, s. 2, for the original s. 293.

4. Subs. by Act 3 of 1895, s. 3, for the original s. 294.
165

294A.

Keeping lottery office.

1*[294A. Keeping lottery office.--Whoever keeps any office or
place for the purpose of drawing any lottery 2*[not being 3*[a
State lottery] or a lottery authorised by the 4* [State]



Government],
for a term which may extend to six months,

a
Pp
d
s

OF OFF

2

Injuring
religion of any cl

insu]
defil
of persons with the intention of thereby
persons or
y to consider such

ny

ers
raw
hal

HAP

And whoever

goods,
on, on
ing of

or

T

GI

XV

to

any event
any ticket,
l be punished with fine which may extend to

publishes any proposal to pay
do or forbear doing anything

or contin
lot,

95.

las
ike

ENC

ES R

ELATING TO R

or

295.
lt the re

Injuring

O

defiling

Lass.

or
[e)

igion

les any pl

s of

lace of

W

=acterea

ot

ith

heir rel

both.

295A.

Deliberate and

of any class by

r
b

e

5*[295A.

fs.

ligion,
escription for a term which may extend to two years,

De
igious feelings of any class by insulting

sha

malicio
insulti

ELIGION

number

or with fi

any
for
or
in
one

relative

or figure

s
t
gency a
a
t

HAPT]

ER XV

G

F OFE

ENC

iS

ELATING TO RELIGIO

place o

defil
f any
worship,

ing
c

ith the
destruct
ll be pu

us acts

f worship, with int

place of worship,
lass.--Whoever destr
or any object held sa

knowledge
ion, damag

that any cl
or defil

shall be punished with imprisonment of either description

ne, or with both.
or to deliver
he benefit of any
ppelicable to the
ny such lottery
housand rupees. ]

N

ent to insult the

with intent to
oys, damages or
cred by any class

insulting the religion of any

ass of persons is
ment as an insult

nished with impriso

intended to outrage r

iberat

wit

outraging the

India
Lsib
the re

Vv

W

8* [three years],

Ss

7* [by

1,

ith

impr

Whoever,
ligious feelings

rel

words, e

e representations
igion or the re

ng its re

e and m

h delib

ither sp
or othe
igious be

or wit

h fine, o

acts inte
its reli

alicious

igion or religious be

nment of either
or with fine, or

igious feelings
1efs.

e

nded to outrage

erate and maliciou

gion or religious
s intention of

class of
oken written,
rwise] insults or
liefs of that class,

of any
or fe)

a

r with both.

6* [citizens of
r by signs or by
ttempts to insult
shall be punished

Lsonment of either description for a term which may extend to


296.

Disturbing religious assembly.

296. Disturbing religious assembly.--Whoever voluntarily causes
disturbance to any assembly lawfully engaged in the performance of
religious worship, or religious ceremonies, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one
year, or with fine, or with both.

297.

Trespassing on burial places, etc.

297. Trespassing on burial places, tc.--Whoever, with the
intention of wounding the feelings of any person, or of insulting the
religion of any person, or with the knowledge that the feelings of any
person are likely to be wounded, or that the religion of any person is
ikely to be insulted thereby,

commits any trespass in any place of worship or on any place of
sepulture, or any place set apart for the performance of funeral rites
or aS a depository for the remains of the dead, or offers any
indignity to any human corpse, or causes disturbance to any persons
assembled for the performance of funeral ceremonies,

1. S. 294A ins. by Act 27 of 1870, s. 10.
2. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for "not authorised by Government".
3. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "a lottery organised

by the Central Government or the Government of a Part A State or
a Part B State" which had been subs. by the A.O. 1950, for "a
State lottery".

4. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for "Provincial".

5. Ins. by Act 25 of 1927, s. 2.

6. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for "His Majesty's subjects".
7. Subs. by Act 41 of 1961, s.3, for certain words.

8. Subs. by s.3, ibid., for "two years".

166

shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.


298.

Uttering words,
feelings.

298.
religious
wounding the
makes any sound
the sight of that
person, shall

Uttering

etc.,

words,
feelings.-——Whoever,

religious feelings
in the hearing of that person or makes a
object in the sight of that
imprisonment of either description for

person or
be punished w
a term which may extend to one year,

with deliberat intent to

with deliberat int
with th deliberat

etc.,

wound

intention

religious

wound
of

nt to

of any person, utters

places any

ith

any word or
ny gesture in

or with fine, or wit

CHAPTER XVI
OF OFFENCES AFFECTING THE HUMAN BODY
CHAPTER XVI
OF OFFENCES AFFECTING THE HUMAN BODY
Of offences affecting life
299.

Culpable homicide.
299. Culpable
with the intention
such bodily injury
that he is likely
culpable homicide.

(a) A

homicide.--Whoever causes
of causing death,
is ]
by such act to cause death,

as

lays sticks
thereby causing death,

death by
or with the intenti
or with

ikely to cause death,

commits t

Illustrations

and turf over a pit, with the
or with the knowledge that death

h both.

doing an act
on of causing
the knowledge
he offence of

intention of
is likely to

be thereby caused. Z, believing the ground to be firm, treads on it,
falls in and is killed. A has committed the offenc of culpable
homicide.

(ob) A knows Z to be behind a bush. B does not know it. A,
intending to cause, or knowing it to be likely to cause Z's death,
induces B to fire at the bush. B fires and kills Z. Here B may be
guilty of no offence; but A has committed the offenc of culpable
homicide.

(c) A, by shooting at a fowl with intent to kill and steal it,
kills B, who is behind a bush; A not knowing that he was there. Here,



although A was doing an unlawful act, he was not guilty of culpable
homicide, as he did not intend to kill B or to cause death by doing
an act that he knew was likely to cause death.

Explanation 1.-A person who causes bodily injury to another who
is labouring under a disorder, disease or bodily infirmity, and
thereby accelerates the death of that other, sha be deemed to have
caused his death.

Explanation 2.-Where death is caused by bodily injury, the person
who causes such bodily injury shall be deemed to have caused the
death, although by resorting to proper remedies and skilful treatment
the death might have been prevented.

Explanation 3.-The causing of the death of a child in the
mother's womb is not homicide. But it may amount to culpable homicide
to cause the death of a iving child, if any part of that child has
been brought forth, though the child may not have breathed or been
completely born.

300.

Murder.

300. Murder.--Except in the cases hereinafter excepted, culpable
homicide is murder, if the act by which the death is caused is done
with the intention of causing death, or-

167

2ndly.-If it is done with the intention of causing such bodily
injury as the offender knows to be likely to cause the death of the
person to whom the harm is caused. or-

3rdly.-If it is done with the intention of causing bodily injury
to any person and the bodily injury intended to be inflicted is
sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death, or-

4thly.-If the person committing the act knows that it is so
imminently dangerous that it must, in all probability, cause death, or
such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, and commits such act
without any excuse for incurring the risk of causing death or such
injury as aforesaid.

Illustrations

(a) A shoots Z with the intention of killing him. Z dies in
consequence. A commits murder.

(b) A, knowing that Z is labouring under such a disease that a
blow is likely to cause his death, strikes him with the intention of
causing bodily injury. Z dies in consequence of the blow. A is guilty
of murder, although the blow might not have been sufficient in the
ordinary course of nature to cause the death of a person in a sound



state of health. But if A, not knowing that Z is labouring under any
disease, gives him such a blow as would not in the ordinary course of
nature kill a person in a sound state of health, here A, although he
may intend to cause bodily injury, is not guilty of murder, if he did
not intend to cause death, or such bodily injury as in the ordinary
course of nature would cause death.

(c) A intentionally gives Z a sword-cut or club-wound sufficient
to cause the death of aman in the ordinary course of nature. Z dies
in consequence. Here A is guilty of murder, although he may not have
intended to cause Z's death.

(d) A without any excuse fires a loaded cannon into a crowd of

persons and kills one of them. A is guilty of murder, although he may
not have had a premeditated design to ki any particular individual.
Exception 1.-When culpable homicide is not murder.-—-Culpable

homicide is not murder if the offender, whilst deprived of the power
of self-control by grave and sudden provocation, causes the death of
the person who gave the provocation or causes the death of any other
person by mistake or accident.

The above exception is subject to the following provisos:-

First.-That the provocation is not sought or voluntarily provoked
by the offender as an excuse for killing or doing harm to any person.

Secondly.-That the provocation is not given by anything done in
obedience to the law, or by a public servant in the lawful exercise of
the powers of such public servant.

Thirdly.-That the provocation is not given by anything done in
the lawful exercise of the right of private defence.

Explanation.-Whether the provocation was grave and sudden enough
to prevent the offence from amounting to murder is a question of fact.

168
Illustrations

(a) A, under the influence of passion excited by a provocation
given by Z, intentionally kills Y, Z's child. This is murder, inasmuch
as the provocation was not given by the child, and the death of the
child was not caused by accident or misfortune in doing an act caused
by the provocation.

(b) Y gives grave and sudden provocation to A. A, on this
provocation, fires a pistol at Y, neither intending nor knowing
himself to be likely to kill Z, who is near him, but out of sight. A
kills Z. Here A has not committed murder, but merely culpable
homicide.

(c) A is lawfully arrested by 2Z, a bailiff. A is excited to
sudden and violent passion by the arrest, and kills Z. This is murder,
inasmuch as the provocation was given by a thing done by a public
servant in the exercise of his powers.



(d)
does not

himself. A

A appears as a witness before Z,
believe a word of A's deposition,
passion by

is moved

This is murder.

(e)

of private

moved to

is murder,

(f£) Z strikes B.
A, a bystander,
him to kill Z,

sudden and
inasmuch as
the exercise of the right of

attempts to pull Z's nose.

to sudden

a Magistrate. Z says that he

and that A has perjured

these words, and kills Z.

in the exercise of the right

defence, lays hold of A to prevent him from doing so. A is

with th

A is guil

death of

Except
the exercise
or property,

of murder.

ton 2.-Culpable

in good

xceeds th

violent

B is by
intending to

in consequence, and kills Z. This
provocation was giving by a thing done in
private defence.

is provocation excited to violent rage.
take advantage of B's rage, and to cause
puts a knife into B's hand for that purpose. B kills 2
knife. Here B may have committed only culpable homicide, but

the person
defence without premeditation,

power given
against whom

not murder if the offender in
faith of the right of private defence or person
to him by law and causes the
exercising such right of
and without any intention of doing more

harm than is necessary for the purpose of such defence.

Z attempts
grievous hu
believing i

from being
but only cu

good faith that he can by no ot
horsewhipped,
pable homicide.

Illustration

to horsewhip A,
rt to A. A draws out a pisto

h amanner as to cause

Z persists in the assault. A

Except

being a

caused.

Exception 4.-Cu
without premeditation

ton 3.-Culpable
blic servant
advancement of public justice,
and causes
be lawful

death by doing an act which he,
and necessary
public servant and without ill-wil

homicide is
or aiding

her means prevent himself
has not committed murder,

murder if the offender,
servant acting for the

homicide is
in a sudden fight int

lpable

ds the powers given to him by law,
in good faith, believes to

due discharge of his duty as such
ll towards t

he person whose death is

murder if it is committed
he heat of passion upon a

sudden quarrel and without the offender's having taken undue advantage

or acted in a cruel or unusual manner.

Explanat

Exception 5.-Cu
whose death

immaterial in
the provocation or commits the first assault.

ion.-It is

homicide is
is caused, being abov

lpable

such cases which party offers

not murder when th person

of eighteen years, suffers

death or takes the risk of death with his own consent.

169

Illustration


years of age,
incapable of

A, by instigat

murder.

301.

Culpable homicide

death was intended.

person w

he

homi
intends

301. Culpable

ion, voluntarily causes Z, a person under eighteen

to commit suicide. Here, on account of Z's youth,
giving consent to his own death; A has therefor

he was

abetted

by causing death of person other than person whose

homicide by causing death of person other than

hose death was intended.--If a person, by doing anything which
intends or knows

to be likely to cause death, commits culpable

neither

cide by causing the death of any person, whose death h
nor knows himself to be likely to cause, the culpable homicide

committed by the offender is of the description of which it would have

been if he had caus

or knew

302.

ed the death of the person whose death he intended

himself to he likely to cause.

Punishment for murder.

302. Punishment for murder.--Whoever commits murder shall be
punished with death, or 1*[imprisonment for life], and shall also
be liable to fine.

303.

Punishment for murder by life-convict.

303. Punishment

sentence of 1%*[impr
punished with death.

304.

for murder by life-convict.--Whoever, being under
isonment for life], commits murder, shall be

Punishment for culpable homicide not amounting to murder.

Whoever commits cul

punished with 1*[imprisonment for life], or imprisonment of

304. Punishment

for culpable homicide not amounting to murder.-—-—
pable homicide not amounting to murder’ shall be

description for at

be

liable to fine,

with the intention

erm which may extend to ten years, and sha
if the act by which the death is caused
of causing death. or of causing such bodily

either
also

is done

injury


as is likely to cause death;

or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to ten years, or with fine, or with both, if the act is done
with the knowledge that it is likely to cause death, but without any
intention to cause death, or to cause such bodily injury as is likely
to cause death.

304A.

Causing death by negligence.

2*[304A. Causing death by negligence.--Whoever causes’ the
death of any person by doing any rash or negligent act not amounting
to culpable homicide shall be punished with imprisonment of either

description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or
with both.]

304B.

Dowry death.

3*[304B. Dowry death.--(1) Where the death of a woman is
caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under
normal circumstances within seven years of her marriage and it is
shown that soon befor her death she was subjected to cruelty or
harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband for, or in
connection with, any demand for dowry, such death shall be called
"dowry death", and such husband or relative shall be deemed to have
caused her death.

Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section, "dowry" shall
have th same meaning as in section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act,
1961 (28 of 1961).

(2) Whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with
imprisonment for aterm which shall not be less than seven years but
which may extend to imprisonment for life.]

1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for
life".

2. S. 304A was ins. by Act 27 of 1870, s. 12.

3. Ins. by Act 43 of 1986, s. 10 (w.e.f. 19-11-1986).

170

305.


Abetment of suicide of child or insane person.

305.
person under

of child or insane person.--If any
ighteen years of age, any insane person, any delirious
person, any idiot, or any person ina state of intoxication commits
suicide, whoever abets th commission of such suicide, sha be
punished with death or 1*[imprisonment for life], or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding ten years, and shall also be ] e to fine.

Abetment of suicide

Lab

306.

Abetment of suicide.

306. Abetment of suicide.--If any person commits suicide, whoever
abets the commission of such suicide, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine.

307.

Attempt to murder.

307. Attempt to murder.--Whoever does any act with such intention
or knowledge, and under such circumstances that, if he by that act
caused death, he would be guilty of murder, = sha be punished with

imprisonment of

either descr ion for a term which

ipt

may extend to ten

years, and shall also be liable to fine; and, if hurt is caused to any
person by such act, the offender shall be table either to
1*[imprisonment for life], or to such punishment as is hereinbefore

mentioned.

Attempts by life-convicts.

Attempts by life-convicts.-2*[When any person offending under

this section is under sentence of 1*[imprisonment for life], he
may, if hurt is caused, be punished with death. ]
Illustrations
(a) A shoots at Z with intention to kill him, under such

circumstances that,

if death ensued A would be guilty of murder. A is

liable to punishment under this section

(b) A,
tender years,
defined by this section,

with the intention of causing the death of a child of
xposes it in a desert place A has committed the offenc
though the death of the child does not ensue.



(c) A,
yet committed
offence defined in this
he is liable to the punishm
3* [the first paragraph of] this

intending to murder
the offenc

(d) A, intending to
mixes
committed th
or delivers

committed th

offence in this se
it to

offenc

308.

section,

murder Z
the same with food which remains in A's keeping;
A places the food on Z's table

Z,
and,

ent
section.

by p

ction.

ide.

Attempt to commit culpable homic

308. Attempt to commit cu

pable ho

provided by

oison,

Z's servants to place it on Z's
defined in this section.

id

buys a gun and loads it. A has not
A fires the gun at Z.
if by such firing he wounds Z,

He has committed the

the latter part of

purchases poison and
A has not yet

table. A has

mic

with such intention or knowledge
he by that act caused death, h
not amounting to murder, shall b
description for a term which ma
or with both; and, if hurt
be punished with imprisonment

may extend to seven years, or wi

and u

nder such circumstances that,

Whoever does any act
if

e would be guilty of culpable homicide
e€ punished with imprisonment of either

y exte

of eit
th fine,

nd to three years,
is caused to any person by such act,
her description for a term which

or with fine,
shall

or with both.

1. Subs.

life".

by Act 26 of 1955, s.

Ins. by Act 27 of 1870, s.1

Ins. by Act 12 of 1891, s.2

117 and

1.

and Sch.

Sch.,

Il.

for

"transportation for

171
Ill
A,

on grave and

ustration

sudden provocation,

fires a pistol at Z,

under

such circumstances that if he there by caused death he would be guilty

of culpable homicide not amounting to murder.
offence defined in this section.
309.
Attempt to commit suicide.
309. Attempt to commit suicide.--Whoever

suicide and does any act towards the commission of such offence,
a term which may extend to

be punished with simple
one year 1*[or with fine,

or wit

imprisonment for

h both. ]

A has committed the
attempts to commit
shall



310.

Thug.

310. Thug.--Whoever, at any

purpose of committing

accompanied with murder,

311.
Punishment.

311. Punishment .--Whoever
2{imprisonment for ife], and shall

robbery

Of the causing of miscarriage, of

exposure of infants,

312.

Causing miscarriage.

or
is a thug.

time after the passing of this Act,
shall have been habitually associated with any other or others for the
by means of or

child-stealing

is a thug, shall
also be liable to fine.

injuries to unborn chi
and of the concealment of births.

312. Causing miscarraige.--Whoever voluntaril
with child to miscarry,

good faith for the purpose of

extend to three years,

be quick with child,

be liable to fine.

Ss

Explanation.—-A woman

shall

or with fine,
punished with
description for a term which may extend to seven years,

hall be

the meaning of this section.

313.

Lf

such miscarriage

saving the life
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may

who causes herself to

Causing miscarriage without woman's consent.

313. Causing miscarriage

commits th offence defined

consent of the woman,
shall be punished

W

whether the

without woman's
in the last preceding section without the
woman is quick with chi

be punished with

y causes
be not caused in
woman, be

of the

miscarry,

dren, of the

a woman

or with both; and, if the woman
imprisonment of either
and shall also

is within

consent.-——-Whoever

ith 2* [imprisonment for

life],

d or not,
or with

imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten

years, and shall also be liabl

le to fine.


314.

Death caused by act done with intent to cause miscarriage.

314. Death caused by act done with intent to cause miscarriage.-—-
Whoever, with intent to cause the miscarriage of a woman with child,
does any act which causes the death of such woman, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
ten years, and shall also be liable to fine;

if act done without woman's consent.

if act done without woman's consent.--and if the act is done
without the consent of the woman, shall be punished either with
2*[imprisonment for life], or with the punishment above mentioned.

Explanation.-It is not essential to this offence that the
offender should know that the act is likely to cause death.

315.

Act done with intent to prevent child being born alive or to cause it
to die after birth.

315. Act done with intent to prevent child being born alive or to
cause it to die after birth.--Whoever before the birth of any child
does any act with the intention of thereby preventing that child from
being born alive or causing it to die after its birth, and does by
such

1. Subs. by Act 8 of 1882, s. 7, for "and shall also be liable to
fine".

2. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for
life".

172

act prevent that child from being born alive, or causes it to die
after its birth, shall, if such act be not caused in good faith for
the purpose of saving the life of the mother, be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten
years, or with fine, or with both.

316.


Causing death of quick unborn child by act amounting to culpable
homicide.

316. Causing death of quick unborn child by act amounting to
culpable homicide.--Whoever does any act under such circumstances,
that if he thereby caused death he would be guilty of culpable
homicide, and does by such act cause the death of a quick unborn
child, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.

Illustration

A, knowing that he is likely to cause the death of a pregnant

woman, does an act which, if it caused the death of the woman, would
amount to culpable homicide. The woman is injured, but does not die;
but the death of an unborn quick child with which she is pregnant is

thereby caused. A is guilty of the offence defined in this section.

317.

Exposure and abandonment of child under twelve years, by parent or
person having care of it.

317. Exposure and abandonment of child under twelv years, by
parent or person having care of it.--Whoever being the father or
mother of a child under the age of twelve years, or having the care of
such child, shall expose or leave such child in any place with the
intention of wholly abandoning such child, sha be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, or with fine, or with both.

Explanation.-This section is not intended to prevent the trial of
the offender for murder or culpable homicide, as the case may be, if
the child die in consequence of the exposure.

318.

Concealment of birth by secret disposal of dead body.

318. Concealment of birth by secret disposal of dead body.--
Whoever, by secretly burying or otherwise disposing of the dead body
of a child whether such child die before or after or during its birth,
intentionally conceals or endeavors to conceal the birth of such
child, sha be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.

Of hurt


319.

Hurt.

319. Hurt.--Whoever causes bodily pain, disease or infirmity to
any person is said to cause hurt.

320.

Grievous hurt.

320. Grievous hurt.--The following kinds of hurt only are
designated as "grievous":-

First.-Emasculation.

Secondly.-Permanent privation of the sight of either eye.
Thirdly.-Permanent privation of the hearing of either ear.
Fourthly.—-Privation of any member or joint.

Fifthly.-Destruction or permanent impairing of the powers of
any member or joint.

Sixthly.-Permanent disfiguration of the head or face.

Seventhly.-Fracture or dislocation of a bone or tooth.

Eighthly.-Any hurt which endangers life or which causes the
sufferer to be during the space of twenty days in severe bodily
pain, or unable to follow his ordinary pursuits.

173

321.

Voluntarily causing hurt.

321. Voluntarily causing hurt.--Whoever does any act with the
intention of thereby causing hurt to any person, or with the knowledge
that he is likely thereby to cause hurt to any person, and does
thereby cause hurt to any person, is said "voluntarily to cause hurt".

322.

Voluntarily causing grievous hurt.


322.
causes hurt,
be likely
is grievous

Vo

to cause

luntarily

hurt, is said

causing grievous
if the hurt which he intends to cause or knows himself to
is grievous hurt,
"voluntar

hurt.--Whoever voluntarily

and if the hurt which he causes
tly to cause grievous hurt".

Explanation.-A person is not said voluntarily to cause grievous
hurt except when he both causes grievous hurt and intends or knows
himself to be likely to cause grievous hurt. But he is said
voluntarily to cause grievous hurt, if intending or knowing himself to
be likely to cause grievous hurt of one kind, he actually causes
grievous hurt of another kind.

Illustration

A, intending of knowing himself to b likely permanently to
disfigure Z's face, gives Z a blow which does not permanently
disfigure Z's face, but which causes Z to suffer severe bodily pain

for the space of twenty days.

323.

Punishment for voluntarily caus

323. Punishment for volunt
the case provided for by sect
be punished with imprisonment
may extend to one year,
rupees, or with both.

324.

A has voluntarily caused grievous hurt.

ing hurt.

arily causing hurt.
ion 334,
of

Whoever,

voluntarily causes hurt,
either description for a term which
or with fine which may extend to one thousand

Voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapons or means.

xcept

in
shall

324. Voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapons or means.-—-—
Whoever, except in the case provided for by section 334, voluntarily
causes hurt by means of any instrument for shooting, stabbing or
cutting, or any instrument which, used as a weapon of offence, is
likely to cause death, or by means of fire or any heated substance, or
by means of any poison or any corrosive substance, or by means of any
explosive substance or by means of any substance which it is
deleterious to the human body to inhale, to swallow, or to receive
into the blood, or by means of any animal, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three years, or with fine, or with both.

325.


Punishment for voluntarily causing grievous hurt

325. Punishment for voluntarily causing grievous hurt.-—Whoever,
except in the case provided for by section 335, voluntarily causes
grievous hurt, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also
be liable to fine.

326.

Voluntarily causing grievous hurt by dangerous weapons or means.

326. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt by dangerous weapons or
means.—--Whoever, except in the case provided for by section 335,
voluntarily causes grievous hurt by means of any instrument for
shooting, stabbing or cutting, or any instrument which, used as a
weapon of offence, is likely to cause death, or by means of fire or
any heated substance, or by means of any poison or any corrosive
substance, or by means of any explosive substance, or by means of any
substance which it is deleterious to the human body to inhale, to

swallow, or to receive into the blood, or by means of any animal,

sha be punished with 1*[imprisonment for life], or with

imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten

years, and shall also be liable to fine.

1. Subs, by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for
life".

174

327.

Voluntarily causing hurt to extort property, or to constrain to an
illegal to an act.

327. Voluntarily causing hurt to extort property, or to constrain
to an illegal to an act.--Whoever voluntarily causes hurt, for the
purpose of extorting from the sufferer, or from any person interested
in the sufferer, any property or valuable security, or of constraining
the sufferer or any person interested in such sufferer to do anything

which is illegal or which may facilitate the commission of an offence,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to ten years, and shal also be liable to fine.

328.

Causing hurt by means of poison, etc., with intent to commit and


offence.

328. Causing hurt by means of poison, etc., with intent to commit
and offence.--Whoever administers to or causes to be taken by any
person any poison or any stupefying, intoxicating or unwholesome drug,
or other thing with intent to cause hurt to such person, or with

intent to commit or to faci

itate the commission of an offence or

knowing it to be likely that

he will thereby cause hurt, shall be

punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may

also be liable to fine.

extend to ten years, and sha

329.

Voluntarily causing grievous
to an illegal act.

hurt to extort property, or to constrain

329. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to extort property, or to
constrain to an illegal act.--Whoever voluntarily causes grievous hurt
for the purpose of extorting from the sufferer or from any person
interested in the sufferer any property or valuable security, or of
constraining the sufferer or any person interested in such sufferer to
do anything that is illegal or which may facilitate the commission of
an offence, shall be punished with 1*[imprisonment for life], or
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten

years, and shall also be liab

330.

Voluntarily causing hurt
restoration of property.

e to fine.

to extort confession or to compel

320. Voluntarily causing hurt to extort confession or to compel

restoration of property.--Whoever voluntarily causes hurt, for the
purpose of extorting from the sufferer or from any person interested
in the sufferer, any confession or any information which may lead to

the detection of an offence
constraining the sufferer or

or misconduct, or for the purpose of
any person interested in the sufferer to

restore or to cause the restoration of any property or valuable
security or to satisfy any claim or demand, or to give information
which may lead to the restoration of any property or valuable

security, shall be punished
for a term which may extend
to fine.

Il

(a) A, a police-officer,

with imprisonment of either description
to seven years, and shall also be liable

lustriations

tortures Z in order to induce Z to

confess that he committed a crime. A is guily of an offence under this

section.


(b) A, a police-officer, tortures B to induce him to point out
where certain stolen property is deposited. A is guilty of an offence
under this section.

(c) A, a revenue officer, tortures z in order to compel him to
pay certain arrears of revenue due from Z. A is guilty of an offence
under this section.

(d) A, a zamindar, tortures a raiyat in order to compel him to
pay his rent. A is guilty of an offence under this section.

331.

Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to extort confession, or to compel
restoration of property.

331. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to extort confession, or

to compel restoration of property.--Whoever voluntarily causes
grievous hurt for the purpose of extorting from the sufferer or from
any person interested in the sufferer any confession or any

information which may lead to the detection of an offence or
misconduct, or for the purpose of constraining the sufferer or any
person

1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for
life".

175

interested in the sufferer to restore or to cause the restoration of
any property or valuable security, or to satisfy any claim or demand
or to give information which may lead to the restoration of any
property or valuable security shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall
also be liable to fine.

332.

Voluntarily causing hurt to deter public servant from his duty.

332. Voluntarily causing hurt to deter public servant from his
duty.--Whoever voluntarily causes hurt to any person being a public
servant in the discharge of his duty as such public servant, or with
intent to prevent or deter that person or any other public servant
from discharging his duty as such public servant, or in consequence of
anything done or attempted to be done by that person in the lawful
discharge of his duty as such public servant, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three years, or with fine, or with both.



333.

Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to deter public servant from his

duty.

333. Vo

untarily causing grievous hurt to deter public servant

from his duty.--Whoever voluntarily causes grievous hurt to any person

being a_ publ
servant, or

lic servant in the discharge of his duty as such public
with intent to prevent or deter that person or any other

public servant from discharging his duty as such public servant, or in
consequence of anything done or attempted to be done by that person in
the lawful discharge of his duty as such public servant, shall be
punished with
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.

334.

imprisonment of either description for a term which may

Voluntarily causing hurt on provocation.

334. Voluntarily causing hurt on provocation.-——Whoever
voluntarily causes hurt on grave and sudden provocation, if he neither
intends nor knows himself to be likely to cause hurt to any person

other than the person who gave the provocation, shall be punished with
imprisonment of

either description for a term which may extend to one

month, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with

both.

335.

Voluntarily causing grievous hurt on provocation.

335. Vol
1* [voluntaril

Ly]

luntarily causing grievous hurt on provocation.-—-Whoever

causes grievous hurt on grave and sudden provocation,

if he neither i
hurt to any person other than the person who gave the provocation
shall be punis
which may exte
thousand rupees

Explanatio

ntends nor knows himself to be likely to cause grievous

hed with imprisonment of either description for a term
nd to four years, or with fine which may extend to two
, or with both.

n.-The last two sections are subject to the same

provisos as Exception 1, section 300.

336.

Act endangering life or personal safety of others.


336. Act endangering life or personal safety of others.-—-Whoever
does any act so rashly or negligently as to endanger human life or the
personal safety others, sha be punished with imprisonment of either
description for aterm which may extend to three months or with fine
which may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees, or with both.

337.

Causing hurt by act endangering life or personal safety of others.

337. Causing hurt by act endangering life or personal safety of
others.—--Whoever causes hurt to any person by doing any act so rashly
or negligently as to endanger human life, or the personal safety of
others, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend
to five hundred rupees, or with both.

1. Ins. by Act 8 of 1882, s. 8,

176

338.

Causing grievous hurt by act endangering life or personal safety of
others.

338. Causing grievous hurt by act endangering life or personal
safety of others.—-Whoever causes grievous hurt to any person by doing
any act so rashly or negligently as to endanger human life, or the
personal safety of others, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with
fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.

Of wrongful restraint and wrongful confinement

339.

Wrongful restraint.

339. Wrongful restraint.--Whoever voluntarily obstructs any
person so as to prevent that person from proceeding in any direction
in which that person has a right to proceed, is said wrongfully to
restrain that person.

Exception.-The obstruction of a private way over land or water
which a person in good faith believes himself to have a lawful right



to obstruct, is not an offence within the meaning of this section.
Illustration
A obstructs a path along which Z has aright to pass. A not

believing in good faith that he has a right to stop the path. Z is
thereby prevented from passing. A wrongfully restrains Z.

340.

Wrongful confinement.

340. Wrongful confinement.--Whoever wrongfully restrains any
person in such a manner as to prevent that person from proceeding
beyond certain circumscribing limits, is said "wrongfully to confine"

that person.

Illustrations

(a) A causes Z to go within a walled space, and locks Z. 2 is
thus prevented from proceeding in any direction beyond the
circumscribing line of wall. A wrongfully confines z.

(b) A places men with firearms at the outlets of a building, and
tells Z that they will fire at Z2 if Z attempts leave the building. A
wrongfully confines Z.

341.

Punishment for wrongful restraint.

341. Punishment for wrongful restraint.--Whoever wrongfully
restrains any person shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a
term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to
five hundred rupees, or with both.

342.

Punishment for wrongful confinement.

342. Punishment for wrongful confinement.--Whoever wrongfully
confines any person shall be punished with simple imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with
fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.

343.


Wrongful confinement for three or more days.

343. Wrongful confinement for three or more days.-——-Whoever
wrongfully confines any person for three days or more, shall _ be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.

344.

Wrongful confinement for ten or more days.

344. Wrongful confinement for ten or more days.-——-Whoever
wrongfully confines any person for ten days, or more, shall _ be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.

177

345.

Wrongful confinement of person for whose liberation writ has been
issued.

345. Wrongful confinement of person for whose liberation writ has
been issued.--Whoever keeps any person in wrongful confinement,
knowing that a writ for the liberation of that person has been duly
issued, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to two years in addition to any term of
imprisonment to which he may be liable under any other section of this
Chapter.

346.

Wrongful confinement in secret.

346. Wrongful confinement in secret.-——-Whoever wrongfully confines
any person in such manner as to indicate an intention that the
confinement of such person may not be known to any person interested
in the person so confined, or to any public servant, or that the place
of such confinement may not be known to or discovered by any such
person or public servant as hereinbefore mentioned, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
two years in addition to any other punishment to which he may be
liable for such wrongful confinement.



347.

Wrongful confi

347. Wron
illegal act.--
of extorting
in the person
constraining t
person to do
facilitate the
imprisonment o
three years, a

348.

Wrongful confi
property.

348. Wro
restoration of
the purpose o
interested in
which may lea
the purpose
interested in
restoration of
claim or dema
restoration of

W

three years, a

349.

Force.

349. Fore
causes motion,

nement to extort property,

gful confinement to
Whoever
from the person confined,
confined, any property
he person confined
anything illegal or
commission of an
f either descripti

nd shall

on

a

nement to extort

ngful confinement to
property.
f extorting from the
the person confined any
d to the detection
of constraining the
the person confined
any property or valuab
nd, or to give

any property or

t

valuab

nd shall also be liab

extort property,
wrongfully confines

[e)

or any person
to give
offence,

for a
so be liable to fine.

confession,

extort
Whoever wrongfully
perso

of an offence or misconduct,
perso

[e)
e

informatio

e

act.

or constrain to illegal

or constrain to
any person for the purpose
or from any person interested
r valuable security or of
interested in such

any information which may

shall be punished with
term which may extend to

or compel restoration of

confession, or compel
confines any person for
n confined or any person
confession or any information
or for
or any person
to cause the
security or to satisfy any

which may lead to the
security, shall be punished

confined
restore or

n

n

ith imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
e to fine.

Of criminal force and assault

e.--A person is said to

change of motion,

use force to another if he

or cessation of motion to that other,

of motion, or

or if he causes to any substance such motion,
cessation of motion as’ brings that
part of that other's body, or with anything
wearing or carrying, or with anything

affects that other's sense of feeling:

causing the motion, or change of motion,
causes that motion, change of motion,

the three ways hereinafter described:

or

substance into

or change
co

which t

so situated that such co
Provided

tha
cessatio

or cessation of motion ino

ntact with any
hat other is
ntact

person
motion,
ne of

the
of

t
n



Firs

Seco
motion or
further a

Thirdly.-By inducing any animal to move,

t.-By his own bodily power.

ndly.-By disposing any substan
change or cessation of moti
ct on his part, or on the part

to cease to move.
178

350.

Criminal force.

350. Criminal fore Whoever int
person, without that person's consent,
any offence, or intending by the use
knowing it to be ikely that by the u
injury, fear or annoyance to the person
said to use criminal force to that other

Tllustration
(a) Z is sitting in a moored boa
moorings, and thus intentionally cause
stream. Here A intentionally causes mo
disposing substances in such a manner
without any other action on any pers
intentionally used force to 2; and if
consent, in order to the committing o

knowing it to be likely that this use of force will cause

or annoya

(b)
causes
to Z by
used force
or knowin
annoy Z,

(c)
pole and
Z,
force to
consent,
criminal

(d)
is own

e has
ike
criminal

h
c
h
]

them

ontact with Z.
done so
y that

nce to Z, A has used criminal f

Z is riding ina chariot. A
to quicken their pace. Here
the animals to change
e to Z; and if A has done this
g it to be likely that he

A has used criminal force to Z.

inducing

Z is riding in a palanquin. A,
stops the palanquin. Here A has

and he has done this by his own bodily power.

Z; and as A has acted thus
in order to the commission
force to Z.

A intentionally pushes against
bodily power moved his own pe
He has therefore intenti
without Z's consent,
he may thereby injure,
force to Z.

fr

may thereby injure,

ce in such amanner that the
on takes place without any
of any other person.
to change its motion, or
ntionally uses force to any
in order to the committing of
of such force to cause, or
se of such force he will cause

to whom the force is used, is

Ss

t ona river. A unfastens the

s the boat to drift down the
tion to Z, and he does this by
that the motion is produced
on's part. A has’ therefore
he has done so without Z's
f any offence, or intending or

injury, fear

orce to Z.

lashes Z's horses and thereby
A has caused change of motion
their motion. A has therefore
without Z's consent, intending
frighten or

intending to rob Z, seizes the
caused cessation of motion to
A has therefore used
without Z's
A has used

intentionally,
an offence.

of

Zin the street. Her
rson so as to bring it into
onally used force to Z; and if
ntending or knowing it to be
ighten or annoy Z, he has used

A has by



(e) A throws a stone, intending or knowing it to be likely that
the stone will be thus brought into contact with Z, or with Z's
clothes, or with something carried by Z, or that it will strike water,
and dash up the water against Z's clothes or something carried by Z.
Here, if the throwing of the stone produce the effect of causing any
substance to come into contact with Z, or Z's clothes, A has used
force to Z, and if he did so without Z's consent, intending thereby to
injure, frighten or annoy Z, he has used criminal force to Z.

(£f) A intentionally pulls up a Woman's veil. Here A intentionally
uses force to her, and if he does so without her consent intending or
knowing it to be likely that he may thereby injure, frighten or
annoy her, he has used criminal force to her.

(g) Z is bathing. A pours into the bath water which he knows to
be boiling. Here A intentionally by his own bodily power causes such
motion in the boiling water as brings that water into contact with Z,
or with other water so situated that such contact must affect Z's
sense of feeling, A has therefore intentionally used force to Z; and
if he has done this without Z's consent intending or knowing it to be
ikely that he may thereby cause injury, fear or annoyance to Z, A has
used criminal force.

179

(h) A incites a dog to spring upon Z, without Z's consent. Here,
if A intends to cause injury, fear or annoyance to 2Z, he uses
criminal force to Z.

351.

Assault.

351. Assault.--Whoever makes any gesture, or any preparation
intending or knowing it to be likely that such gesture or preparation
will cause any person present to apprehend that he who makes that
gesture or preparation is about to use criminal force to that person,
is said to commit an assault.

Explanation.-Mere words do not amount to an assault. But the
words which a person uses may give to his gestures or preparation such
a meaning as may make thos gestures or preparations amount to an
assault.

Illustrations

(a) A shakes his fist at Z, intending or knowing it to be likely
that he may thereby cause Z to believe that A is about to strike Z. A
has committed an assault.

(b) A begins to unloose the muzzle of a ferocious dog, intending
or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby cause Z to believe that
he is about to cause the dog to attack Z. A has committed an assault



upon Z.

(c) A takes up a stick, saying to Z, "I will give you a beating".
Here, though the words used by A could in no case amount to an
assault, and though th mere gesture, unaccompanied by any other
circumstances, might not amount to an assault,the gesture explained by
the words may amount to an assault.

352.

Punishment for assault or criminal force otherwise than on grave
provocation.

352. Punishment for assault or criminal force otherwise than on
grave provocation.--Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any
person otherwise than on grave and sudden provocation given by that
person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend
to five hundred rupees, or with both.

Explanation.-Grave and sudden provocation will not mitigate the
punishment for an offence under this section, if the provocation is
sought or voluntarily provoked by the offender as an excuse for the
offence, or

if the provocation is given by anything done in obedience to the
law, or by a public servant, in the lawful exercise of the powers of
such public servant, or

if the provocation is given by anything done in the lawful
exercise of the right of private defence.

Whether the provocation was grave and sudden enough to mitigate
the offence, is a question of fact.

353.

Assault or criminal force to deter public servant from discharge of
his duty.

353. Assault or criminal force to deter public servant from
ischarge of his duty.--Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any
erson being a public servant in the execution of his duty as such
ublic servant, or with intent to prevent or deter that person from
ischarging his duty as such public servant, or in consequence of
nything done or attempted to be done by such person to the lawful
ischarge of his duty as such public servant, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two
years, or with fine, or with both.

ae &2'' 2

180


354.

Assault or criminal force to woman with intent to outrage her
modesty.

354. Assault or criminal force to woman with intent to outrage
her modesty.--Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any woman,
intending to outrage or knowing it to be likely that he will there by
outrage her modesty, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or
with both.

355.

Assault or criminal force with intent to dishonour person, otherwise
than on grave provocation.

355. Assault or criminal force with intent to dishonour person,
otherwise than on grave provocation.--Whoever assaults or uses
criminal force to any person, intending thereby to dishonour that
person, otherwise than on grave and sudden provocation given by that
person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.

356.

Assault or criminal force in attempt to commit theft of property
carried by a person.

356. Assault or criminal force in attempt to commit theft of
property carried by a person.--Whoever assaults or uses criminal force
to any person, in attempting to commit theft on any property which
that person is then wearing or carrying shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two
years, or with fine, or with both.

357.

Assault or criminal force in attempt wrongfully to confine a person.

357. Assault or criminal force in attempt wrongfully to confine a
person.-—-Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any person, in
attempting wrongfully to confine that person, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one



year, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with
both.

358.

Assault or criminal force on grave provocation.

358. Assault or criminal force on grave provocation.--Whoever
assaults or uses criminal force to any person on grave and sudden
provocation given by that person, shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for aterm which may extend to one month, or with fine
which may extend to two hundred rupees, or with both.

Explanation.-The last section is subject to the same explanation
as section 352.

Of kidnapping, abduction, slavery and forced labour

359.

Kidnapping.

359. Kidnapping.--Kidnapping is of two kinds : kidnapping from
1*[India], and kidnapping from lawful guardianship.

360.

Kidnapping from India.

360. Kidnapping from India.--Whoever conveys any person beyond
the limits of 1*[India] without the consent of that person, or of
some person legally authorized to consent on behalf of that person, is
said to kidnap that person from 1* [India].

361.

Kidnapping from lawful guardianship.

361. Kidnapping from Jlawful guardianship.--Whoever takes or
entices any minor under 2*[sixteen] years of age if a male, or
under 3*[eighteen] years of age if a female, or any person of

unsound mind, out of the keeping of the lawful guardian of such minor
or person of unsound mind, without the consent of such guardian, is
said to kidnap such minor or person from lawful guardianship.



Explanation.
any person lawfu

-The words “lawful guardian" in this section include
lly entrusted with the care or custody of such minor

or other person.
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the States."
2. Subs. by Act 42 of 1949, s. 2, for "fourteen".
3. Subs., by s. 2, ibid., for "sixteen".
181

Exception.-This section does not extend to the act of any person
who in good faith believes himself to be the father of an illegitimate
child, or who in good faith believes himself to be entitled to the
lawful custody of such child, unless such act is committed for an
immoral or unlawful purpose.
362.
Abduction.

362. Abduction.--Whoever by force compels, or by any deceitful

means induces any
person.

363.

Punishment for ki

363.
1* [India] or
imprisonment of
seven years, and

363A.

Kidnapping or mai

2*[363A. Kid
begging.--(1) Who
guardian of a mi
such minor may b
be punishable wit

Punishme
from

person to go from any place, is said to abduct that

dnapping.

nt for kidnapping.--Whoever kidnaps any person from

lawful guardianship, shall be punished with
either description for a term which may extend to
shall also be liable to fine.

ming a minor for purposes of begging.

napping or maiming a minor for
ever kidnaps any minor or, not being the lawful
nor, obtains the custody of the minor, in order that
e employed or used for the purposes of begging shall
h imprisonment of either description for a term which

purposes of

may extend to ten

(2)

Whoever

years, and shall also be liable to fine.

maims any minor in order that such minor may be


employed or used for the purposes of begging shall be punishable with
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.

(3) Where any person, not being the lawful guardian of a minor,
employs or uses such minor for the purposes of begging, it shall be
presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that he kidnapped or
otherwise obtained the custody of that minor in order that the minor
might be employed or used for the purposes of begging.

(4) In this section, -
(a) "begging" means-—

(i) soliciting or receiving alms in a public place,
whether under the pretence of singing, dancing,
fortunetelling, performing tricks or selling articles or
otherwise;

(ii) entering on any private premises for the purpose of
soliciting or receiving alms;

(iii) exposing or exhibiting, with the object of
obtaining or extorting alms, any sore, wound, injury,
deformity or disease, whether of himself or of any other
person or of an animal;

(iv) using aminor as an exhibit for the purpose of
soliciting or receiving alms;

(b) "minor" means-

(i) in the case of a male, a person under sixteen years
of age; and

(ii) in the case of a female, a person under eighteen
years of age.]

1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the States".
2. Ins. by Act 52 of 1959, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15-1-1960).

182

364.

Kidnapping or abducting in order to murder.

364. Kidnapping or abducting in order to murder.--Whoever kidnaps
or abducts any person in order that such person may be murdered or may
be so disposed of as to be put in danger of being murdered, shall be
punished with 1*[imprisonment for life] or rigorous imprisonment
for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to
fine.


IIIustrations

(a) A kidnaps Z from 2*[India], intending or knowing it to be
likely that Z2 may be sacrificed to an idol. A has committed the
offence defined in this section.

(b) A forcibly carries or entices B away from his home in order
that B may be murdered. A has committed th offence defined in this
section.

364A.

Kidnappin for ransom, etc.

3*364A. Kidnapping for ransom, etc.-Whoever kidnaps or abducts
any person or keeps a person in detention after such kidnapping or
abduction, and threatens to cause death or hurt to such person, or by
his conduct gives rise to a reasonable appreension that such person
may be put to death or hurt, or causes hurt or death to such person in
order to compel the Government or any foreign State or international
inter-governmental organisation or any other person to do or abstain
from doing any act or to pay a ransom, sha be punishable with death
or imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.

365.

Kidnapping or abducting with intent secretly and wrongfully to confine
person.

365. Kidnapping or abducting with intent secretly and wrongfully
to confine person.-——-Whoever kidnaps or abducts any person with intent

to cause that person to be secretly and wrongfully confined, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.

366.

Kidnapping, abducting or inducing woman to compel her marriage, etc.
366. Kidnapping, abducting or inducing woman to compel her
marriage, tc.--Whoever kidnaps or abducts any woman with intent that
she may be compelled, or knowing it to be likely that she will be
compelled, to marry any person against her will, or in order that she
may be forced or seduced to illicit intercourse, or knowing it to be
likely that she will be forced or seduced to illicit intercourse,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to _ fine;



3*[and whoever, by means of criminal intimidation as defined in this
Code or of abuse of authority or any other method of compulsion,
induces any woman to go from any place with intent that she may be, or
knowing that it is likely that she wi be, forced or seduced to
illicit intercourse with another person shall also be punishable as
aforesaid].

4*[366A.

Procuration of minor girl.

6*[366A. Procuration of minor girl.--Whoever, by any means
whatsoever, induces any minor girl under the age of eighteen years to

go from any place or to do any act with intent that such girl may be,
or knowing that it is likely that she wil be, forced or seduced to
illicit intercourse with another person shall be punishable with
imprisonment which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable
to fine.

366B.

Importation of girl from foreign country.

366B. Importation of girl from foreign country.--Whoever imports
into 2*[India] from any country outside India 7*[or from the State
of Jammu and Kashmir] any girl under the age of twenty-one years with
intent that she may be, or knowing it to be likely that she will be,
forced or seduced to illicit intercourse with another person,

5* * * * *

shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine.]

1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for
life".

Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the States".

Ins. by Act 42 of 1997 s. 2.

Subs. by Act 24 of 1995, s. 2.

Ins. by Act 20 of 1923, s. 2.

Ins. by s.3, ibid.

Ins. by Act 3 of 1951, s.3 and Sch.,

Certain words omitted by s.3 and Sch., ibid.

oan AN OB WW DN

183

367.


Kidnapping or abducting in order to subject person to grievous hurt,
slavery, etc.

367. Kidnapping or abducting in order to subject person to
grievous hurt, slavery, etc.--Whoever kidnaps or abducts any person in
order that such person may be subjected, or may be so disposed of as

to be put in danger of being subjected to grievous hurt, or slavery,
or to the unnatura ust of any person, or knowing it to be likely
that such person will be so subjected or disposed of, sha be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may

extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.

368.

Wrongfully concealing or keeping in confinement, kidnapped or abducted
person.

368. Wrongfully concealing or keeping in confinement, kidnapped
or abducted person.--Whoever, knowing that any person has been
kidnapped or has been abducted, wrongfully conceals or confines such

person, shall be punished in the same manner as if he had kidnapped or
abducted such person with the same intention or knowledge, or for the
same purpose as that with or for which he conceals or detains such
person in confinement.

369.

Kidnapping or abducting child under ten years with intent to steal
from its person.

369. Kidnapping or abducting child under ten years with intent to
steal from its person.--Whoever kidnaps or abducts any child under the
age of ten years with the intention of taking dishonestly any movable
property from the person of such child, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for aterm which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.

370.
Buying or disposing of any person as a slave.

370. Buying or disposing of any person as a sSlave.-——-Whoever
imports, exports, removes, buys, sells or disposes of any person as a
slave, or accepts, receives or detains against his will any person as
a slave, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to
fine.



371.

Habitual dealing in slaves.

371. Habitual dealing in slaves.-——Whoever habitually imports,
exports, removes, buys, sells traffics or deals in slaves, shall be
punished with 1*[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of
either description for a term not exceeding ten years, and shall also
be liable to fine.

372.

Selling minor for purposes of prostitution, etc.

372. Selling minor for purposes of prostitution, etc.--Whoever
sells, lets to hire, or otherwise disposes of any 2*[person under
the age of eighteen years with intent that such person shall at any
age be employed or used for the purpose of prostitution or illicit
intercourse with any person or for any unlawful and immoral purpose,
or knowing it to be likely that such person will at any age be]
employed or used for any such purpose, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine.

3* [Explanation I.-When a female under the age of eighteen
years is sold, let for hire, or otherwise disposed of to a prostitute
or to any person who keeps or manages a brothel, the person so
disposing of such female shall, unti the contrary is proved, be

presumed to have disposed of her with the intent that she sha be
used for the purpose of prostitution.

Explanation II.-For the purposes of this section "illicit
intercourse" means sexual intercourse between persons not united by
marriage, or by any union or tie which though not amounting to a
marriage, is recognised by the persona aw or custom of the community
to which they belong or, where they belong to different communities,
of both such communities, as constituting between them a quasi-marital

relation. ]

373.

Buying minor for purposes of prostitution, etc.

373. Buying minor for purposes of prostitution, etc.--Whoever
buys, hires or otherwise obtains possession of any 2* [person under
the age of eighteen years with intent that such person shall at



1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for

life".

2. Subs. by Act 18 of 1924, s. 2, for "minor under the age of
eighteen years with intent that such minor shall be employed or
used for the purpose of prostitution or for any unlawful and
immoral purpose, or knowing it to be likely that such minor will
be".

3. Ins. by s.3, ibid,

184

any age be employed or used for the purpose of prostitution or illicit

intercourse with any person or for any unlawful and immoral purpose,

or knowing it to be likely that such person will at any age be]
employed or used for any such purpose, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten

years, and shall also be liable to fine.

1* [Explanation I.-Any prostitute or

any person keeping or

managing a brothel, who buys, hires or otherwise obtains possession of
a female under the age of eighteen years shall, until the contrary is
proved, be presumed to have obtained possession of such female with
the intent that she sha be used for the purpose of prostitution.

Explanation II.-"Illicit intercourse"
section 372.]

374.

Unlawful compulsory labour.

has the same meaning as in

374. Unlawful compulsory labour.--Whoever unlawfully compels any
person to labour against the will of that person, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to

one year, or with fine, or with both.

2* [Sexual offences

375.
Rape.

375. Rape.--A man is said to commit "rape" who, except in the
case hereinafter excepted, has sexual intercourse with a woman under
circumstances falling under any of the six following descriptions:-

First.-Against her will.
Secondly.-Without her consent.

Thirdly.-With her consent, when

her consent has been

obtained by putting her or any person in whom she is interested


in fear of death or of hurt.

Fourthly.-With her consent,
not her husband, and that her consent
believes that he is another man to
herself to be lawfully married.

whom

Fifthly.-Wit
consent, by reaso
administration by
stupefying or unw
the nature and co

h her consent, when,
n of unsoundness of mind
him personally or
holesome substance,
nseque

she

Sixthly.-With or without her consent,
sixteen years of age.

Explanation.—Penetration is
intercourse necessary to the offence of rape.

Exception.-Sexual intercourse by a
not being under fifteen years of age,

man

wife

376.

Punishment for rape.

376.
provided for by sub-section

Punishment for rape.-—-(1)
(2),

Whoever,
commits rape

imprisonment of either description for a term which
ife or fora
e to fine unless t

than seven years but which may be for
extend to ten years and shall also be liab

when the man knows
is

through
is unable to
neces of that to which s

sufficient to co

except

th
bec

at he is
aus sh

given

she is or

at the time of giving

ntoxicatio
another
u

or i

he gives

whe she

nstitute t

with his own

is not rape.

in t
shall be puni
shall no
term Ww

raped is his own wife and is not under tw
case,

LV

years of age,

ne or with bot

believes

such
nor the
of any
nderstand
consent.

is under

he sexual

wife, the

he cases
shed with
t be less
hich may
he woman
in which

he shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to two years or with fi

ns

1. Ins. by Act 18 of 1924, s. 4.

2. Subs. by Act 43 of 1983, s.3 for the heading "Of rape" and “ss.
375 and 376.

185

Provided that the court may,
be mentioned in the judgment,
term of less than seven years.

(2) Whoever, -

(a) being a police officer commits rape-

for adequate and special reasons to
impose a sentence of imprisonment for a

within the
he is appo

(1)

in

the premises

limits of
inted; or

the police station to which

of any station house whether or


shall
not b
liabl

be me
eithe

of pe
the p
meani

inst

(b) b

position and
ic servant

pub
to him;

or

(c) b

remand home or ot

t
fe)

law for
instituti
rape on
instituti

[e)

(d) b
takes adva
woman in t

(e) c

(£) c
of age; or

(g)
be punis

e less tha
e to fine:

Provided t
ntioned i
r descript

Explanatio
rsons act
ersons
ng of this

Explanati

tut

women
e
child

inclu
treat
med

376A.

Lon,

or

ren.

des the
ment of

shall

on
whether
children or
stablished and maintained for

Explanation 3.-"hosp
precincts of
persons during
ical attention or rehabilitatio

not situated
appointed; or

in the police station to which he is

iii) on a woman in his custody or in the custody of a

police officer subordinate to him; or

a public servant, takes advantage of his official
commits rape on a woman in his custody as_ such
or in the custody of a public servant subordinate

eing

eing on the management or on the staff of a jail,
her place of custody established by or under any
being in force or of a women's or children's
advantage of his official position and commits

nmmate of such jail, remand home, place or

he time
n takes
any 2.
n; or

eing n the
ntage of his
hat hospital;

fe) management or on the staff of a hospital,
official position and commits rape on a

or

ommits rape on a woman knowing her to be pregnant; or

ommits rape on a woman when she is under twelve years

commits gang rape,

hed with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall
n ten years but which may be for life and shall also be

hat the court may, for adequate and special reasons to
n the judgment, impos a sentenc of imprisonment of
ion for a term of less than ten years.

ni.
ing

-Where a women's is raped by one or more in a group
in furtherance of their common intention, each of
be deemed to have committed gang rape within the
sub-section.

2. institution"
orphanage or a home for neglected
home or by any other name, which is

he reception and care of women or

women's or children's
called and

a widows!

means an

t

Ltal" means the precincts of the hospital and
any institution for the reception and
convalescence or of persons requiring

nN.



Intercourse by a man with his wife during separation.

376A.
Whoever has
separately from him un
or usage without her
either description
also be liab

Intercourse
sexual int

e to fine.

186

376B.

man with his wi
ercourse ith his own
der a decree of separa
consent sha be punis

by a
W

fe during separation.-—-—
wife, who is living
tion or under any custom

hed with imprisonment of

for a term which may extend to two years and shall

Intercourse by public servant with woman in his custody.

376B. Intercourse
Whoever, being a publi
position and induces o
such public
to him,
not

to have
amounting

sexua

to the

imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to fi

years and shall also be
376C.

Intercourse by superint

376C. Intercourse

by public servant with
c servant, takes adva
r seduces, any woman,

1 intercourse with him,

offence of rape, s

]

table to fine.

endent of jail, remand

by superintendent of j

Whoever, being the sup
other place of custody
being in force or of
advantage of his offic

rintendent or manager o

established by or un
a women's or childr
tal position and induc

inmate of such jail, r
intercourse with him,
offence of rape, shal
description for a term
be liable to fine.

"Su

emand home, place or in
such sexual intercours
be punished with

woman in his custody.--
ntage of his official
who is in his custody as

servant or in the custody of a public servant subordinate

intercourse
ith

such sexua
hall be punished

W

LVe

home, etc.

ail, remand home, etc.--
f a jail, remand home or
der any law for the time
en's institution takes
es or seduces any female
stitution to have sexual
e not amounting to the
imprisonment of either

which may extend to f

in relat

anation 1.

Exp

perintendent"

ive years and shall also

ion to a jail, remand

home or other place of custody or a women's or children's institution,

includes a person hold
place or institution b
or control over its inm

shall hav
section 376.

th

same m

ing
y virtue of whic

any other office in
h he ca

such jail,
xercis

remand home,

ates.

aning as in Explanation

n any authority

Explanation 2.-The expression "women's or children's institution"

2 to sub-section (2) of


376D.

Intercourse by any member of the management or staff of a hospital
with any woman in that hospital.

376D. Intercourse by any member of the management or staff of a
hospital with any woman in that hospital.--Whoever, being on the
management of a hospital or being on the staff of a hospital takes
advantage of his position and has sexual intercourse with any woman in
that hospital, such sexual intercourse not amounting to the offence of

rape, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.-The expression "hospital" shall have the same

meaning as in Explanation 3 to sub-section (2) of section 376.]

Of unnatural offences

377.

Unnatural offences.

377. Unnatural offences.——-Whoever voluntarily has carnal
intercourse against the order of nature with any man, woman or animal,
shall be punished with 1* [imprisonment for life], or with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten
years, and sha also be liable to fine.

Explanation.-—Penetration is sufficient to constitute the carnal
intercourse necessary to the offence described in this section.

7

CHAPTER XVII

OF OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY

CHAPTER XVII

OF OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY

Of theft

378.

Theft.

378. Theft.--Whoever, intending to take dishonestly any movable


prope
conse
commi

not

rty out of the possession of any person without that person's
nt, moves that property in order to such taking, is said to
t theft.

Explanation 1.-A thing so long as it is attached to the earth,
being movable property, is not the subject of theft; but it

becomes capable of being the subject of theft as soon as it is severed

from

the earth.

Subs, by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for
life ".

187

the s

remov
it fr

MOve,
conse

expre
posse
expre

disho
Here,
has c

dog t
dog o
as so

bullo
the t
theft

plate
has c

a war
and s
ther

Explanation 2.-A moving effected by the same act which effects
everance may be a theft.

Explanation 3.-A person is said to cause a thing to move by
ing an obstacle which prevented it from moving or by separating
om any other thing, as well as by actually moving it.

Explanation 4.-A person, who by any means causes an animal to
is said to move that animal, and to move everything which, in
quence of the motion so caused, is moved by that animal.

Explanation 5.-The consent mentioned in the definition may be
ss or implied, and may b given ither by the person in
ssion, or by any person having for that purpose authority either
ss or implied.

Illustrations

(a) A cuts down atree on Z's ground, with the intention of
nestly taking the tree out of Z's possession without Z's consent.
as soon as A has’ severed the tr in order to such taking, he
ommitted theft.

(ob) A puts a bait for dogs in his pocket, and thus induces Z's
o follow it. Here, if A's intention be dishonestly to take the
ut of Z's possession without Z's consent, A has committed theft
on as Z's dog has begun to follow A.

(c) A meets a bullock carrying a box of treasure. He drives th
ck in a certain direction, in order that he may dishonestly take

reasure. As soon as the bullock begins to move, A has committed
of the treasure.

(d) A being Z's servant, and entrusted by Z with the care of Z's
, Gdishonestly runs away with the plate, without Z's consent. A
ommitted theft.

(e) Z, going on a journey, entrusts his plate to A, the keeper of
ehouse, till Z shall return. A carries the plate to a goldsmith
ells it. Her the plate was not in Z's possession. It could not

theft

fore b taken out of Z's possession, and A has not committed
, though he may have committed criminal breach of trust.



(£f) A finds a ring belonging to Z on a table in the house which Z
occupies. Her the ring is in Z's possession, and if A dishonestly
removes it, A commits theft.

(g) A finds a ring lying on the high-road, not in the possession
of any person. A, by taking it, commits no theft, though he may commit
criminal misappropriation of property.

(h) A sees a ring belonging to Z lying on a table in Z's house.
Not venturing to misappropriate the ring immediately for fear of
search and detection, A hides the ring in a place where it is highly
improbable that it will ever be found by 2Z, with the intention of
taking the ring from the hiding place and selling it when the loss is
forgotten. Here A, at the time of first moving the ring, commits
theft.

(i) A delivers his watch to 2Z, a jeweller, to be regulated. Z
carries it to his shop. A, not owing to the jeweller any debt for
which the jeweller might lawfully detain the watch as a security,
enters the shop openly, takes his watch by force out of Z's hand, and
carries it away. Here A, though he may have committed criminal
trespass and assault, has not committed theft, inasmuch as what he did
was not done dishonestly.

188

(j) If A owes money to Z for repairing the watch, and if 2Z
retains the watch lawfully as a security for the debt, and A takes the
watch out of Z's possession, with the intention of depriving Z of the
property as a security for his debt, he commits theft, inasmuch as he
takes it dishonestly.

(k) Again, if A, having pawned his watch to Z, takes it out of
Z's possession without Z's consent, not having paid what he borrowed
on the watch, he commits theft, though the watch is his own property
inasmuch as he takes it dishonestly.

(1) A takes an article belonging to Z2 out of Z's possession
without Z's consent, with the intention of keeping it until he obtains
money from Z as a reward for its restoration. Here A _ takes
dishonestly; A has therefor committed theft.

(m) A, being on friendly terms with Z, goes into Z's library in
Z's absence, and takes away a book without Z's express consent for the
purpose merely of reading it, and with the intention of returning it.
Here, it is probable that A may have conceived that he had Z's implied
consent to use Z's book. If this was A's impression, A has not
committed theft.

(n) A asks charity from Z's wife. She gives A money, food and
clothes, which A knows to belong to Z her husband. Here it is probable
that A may conceive that Z's wife is authorized to give away alms. If
this was A's impression, A has not committed theft.

(o) A is the paramour of Z's wife. She gives a valuable property,
which A knows to belong to her husband Z, and to be such property as



she has not authority from Z to give. If A takes the property
dishonestly, he commits theft.

(ep) A, in good faith, believing property belonging to Z to be A's

own property, takes that property out of B's possession. Here, as A
does not take dishonestly, he does not commit theft.

379.

Punishment for theft.

379. Punishment for theft.--Whoever commits theft shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.

380.

Theft in dwelling house, etc.

380. Theft in dwelling house, etc.-—-Whoever commits theft in any
building, tent or vessel, which building, tent or vessel is used as a
human dwelling, or used for the custody of property, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.

381.

Theft by clerk or servant of property in possession of master.

381. Theft by clerk or servant of property in possession of
master.-—-Whoever, being a clerk or servant, or being employed in the
capacity of aclerk or servant, commits theft in respect of any
property in the possession of his master or employer, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.

382.

Theft after preparation made for causing death, hurt or restraint in
order to the committing of the theft.

382. Theft after preparation made for causing death, hurt or
restraint in order to the committing of the theft.--Whoever commits
theft, having made preparation for causing death, or hurt, or
restraint, or fear of death, or of hurt, or of restraint, to any



person, in order to the committing of such theft, or in order to the
effecting of his escape after the committing of such theft or in order
to the retaining of property taken by such theft, shall be punished
with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years,
and shall also be liable to fine.

Tllustrations
(a) A commits theft on property in Z's possession; and, while
committing this theft, he has a loaded pistol under his garment,
having provided this pistol for the purpose of hurting Z in case Z
should resist. A has committed the offence defined in this section.

189

(b) A picks Z's pocket, having posted several of his companions
near him, in order that they may restrain Z, if Z should perceive what
is passing and should resist, or should attempt to apprehend A. A has
committed the offence defined in this section.

Of extortion

383.

Extortion.

383. Extortion.--Whoever intentionally puts any person in fear of
any injury to that person, or to any other, and thereby dishonestly
induces the person so put in fear to deliver to any person any
property, or valuable security or anything signed or sealed which may
be converted into a valuable security, commits "extortion".

Illustrations

(a) A threatens to publish a defamatory libel concerning Z unless
Z gives him money. He thus induces Z to give him money. A _ has
committed extortion.

(b) A threatens Z2 that he will keep Z's child in worngful
confinement, unless Z will sign and deliver to A a promissory note
binding Z to pay certain monies to A to Z sings and delivers the not

A has committed extortion.

(c) A threatens to send club-men to plough up Z's field unless Z
will sign and deliver to B a bond binding Z under a penalty to deliver
certain produce to B, and thereby induces Z to sign and deliver the
bond. A has committed extortion.

(d) A, by putting Z2 in fear of grievous hurt, dishonestly induces
Zto sign or affix his seal to a blank paper and deliver it to A. Z
sings and delivers the paper to A. Here, as the paper so signed may be
converted into a valuable security A has committed extortion.



384.

Punishment for extortion.

384.

be punished
may extend to three years,

385.

commits extortion shall
of either description for a term which
or with fine, or with both.

Punishment for extortion.-—-Whoever
with imprisonment

Putting person in fear of injury in order to commit extortion.

385.

extortion.

person in
shall be
which may

386.

Extortion

386.

Putting person in fear of injury in order to commit
—-Whoever, in order to the committing of extortion, puts any
fear, or attempts to put any person in fear, of any injury,

punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.

by putting a person in fear of death or grievous hurt.

Extortion by putting a person in fear of death or grievous
hurt.--Whoever commits extortion by putting any person in fear of
of grievous hurt to that person or to any other, shall be

death or

punished with

extend to

387.

Putting person

imprisonment of either description for a term which may
ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.

in fear of death or of grievous hurt, in order to

commit extortion.

387.
order to
extortion,

grievous hurt
imprisonment of
seven years,

388.

Extortion

or imprisonment for life,

Putting person in fear of death or
commit extortion.--Whoever in order
puts or attempts to put any
to that person or to any

either description for
and shall also be liable to

of grievous hurt, in
to the committing of
person in fear of death or of
other, shall be punished with
a term which may extend to
fine.

threat of accusation of an
etc.

by offence punishable with death


388. Extortion by threat of accusation of an offence punishable
with death or imprisonment for life, etc.--Whoever commits extortion
by putting any person in fear of an accusation against that person or
any other, of having committed or attempted to commit any offence
punishable with death, or with 1* [imprisonment for life], or with
imprisonment for aterm which may extend to ten years, or of having
attempted to induce any other person to commit such offence, shall

1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for
life".

190

shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine; and,
if th offence b one punishable under section 377 of this Code, may
be punished with 1*[imprisonment for life].

389.

Putting person in fear or accusation of offence, in order to commit
extortion.

389. Putting person in fear or accusation of offence, in order to
commit extortion.--Whoever, in order to the committing of extortion,
puts or attempts to put any person in fear of an accusation, against
that person or any other, of having committed, or attempted to commit,
an offence punishable with death or with 1*[imprisonment for life],
or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine; and, if the
offence be punishable under section 377 of this Code, may be punished
with 1*[imprisonment for life].

Of robbery and dacoity

390.

Robbery.

390. Robbery.--In all robbery there is either theft or extortion.

When theft is robbery.

When theft is robbery.--Theft is "robbery" if, in order to the
committing of the theft, or in committing the theft, or in carrying


away or attempting to carry away property obtained by the theft, the
offender, for that end, voluntarily causes or attempts to cause to any
person death or hurt or wrongful restraint, or fear of instant death
or of instant hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint.

When extortion is robbery.

When extortion is robbery.--Extortion is "robbery" if the
offender, at the time of committing the extortion, is in the presence
of the person put in fear, and commits the extortion by putting that
person in fear of instant death, of instant hurt, or of instant
wrongful restraint to that person or to some other person, and, by so
putting in fear, induces the person, so put in fear then and there to
deliver up the thing extorted.

Explanation.-Th offender is said to be present if he is
sufficiently near to put the other person in fear of instant death, of
instant hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint.

Illustrations

(a) A holds Z down, and fraudulently takes Z's money and jewels
from Z's clothes, without Z's consent. Here A has committed theft,
and, in order to the committing of that theft, has voluntarily caused
wrongful restraint to Z. A has therefore committed robbery.

(ob) A meets Z on the high road, shows a pistol, and demands Z's
purse. Z, in consequence, surrenders his purse. Here A has extorted
the purse from Z by putting him in fear of instant hurt, and being at
the time of committing the extortion in his presence. A has therefore
committed robbery.

(c) A meets Z and Z's child on the high road. A takes the child,
and threatens to filing it down a precipice, unless Z delivers his
purse. Z, in consequence, delivers his purse. Here A has extorted the
purse from 2Z, by causing Z to be in fear of instant hurt to the child
who is there present. A has therefore committed robbery on Z.

(d) A obtains property from Z by saying-"Your child is in the
hands of my gang, and will be put to death unless you send us ten

thousand rupees". This is extortion, and punishable as such: but it is
not robbery, unless 2 is put in fear of the instant death of his
child.

391.

Dacoity.

391. Dacoity.--When five or more persons conjointly commit or
attempt to commit a robbery, or where the whole number of persons
conjointly committing or attempting to commit a robbery, and persons
present and aiding such commission or attempt, amount to five or more,



every person so committing, attempting or aiding, is said to commit
"dacoity".

1. Subs, by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for
life."

191

392.

Punishment for robbery.

392. Punishment for robbery.--Whoever commits robbery shall be
punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine; and, if the robbery be
committed on the highway between sunset and sunrise, the imprisonment
may be extended to fourteen years.

393.

Attempt to commit robbery.

393. Attempt to commit robbery.--Whoever attempts to commit
robbery shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which
may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.

394.

Voluntarily causing hurt in committing robbery.

394. Voluntarily causing hurt in committing robbery.--If any
person, in committing or in attempting to commit robbery, voluntarily
causes hurt, such person, and any other person jointly concerned in
committing or attempting to commit such robbery, shall be punished
with 1*[imprisonment for life], or with rigorous imprisonment for a
term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.

395.

Punishment for dacoity.

395. Punishment for dacoity.--Whoever commits dacoity shall be
punished with 1* [imprisonment for life], or with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also


be liable to fine.

396.

Dacoity with murder.

396. Dacoity with murder.--If any one of five or more persons,
who are conjointly committing dacoity, commits murder in so committing
dacoity, every one of those persons shall be punished with death, or
1*[imprisonment for life], or rigorous imprisonment for a term which
may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.

397.

Robbery or dacoity, with attempt to cause death or grievous hurt.

397. Robbery or dacoity, with attempt to cause death or grievous
hurt.--If, at the time of committing robbery or dacoity, the offender

uses any deadly weapon, or causes grievous hurt to any person, so
attempts to cause death or grievous hurt to any person, the
imprisonment with which such offender shall be punished shall not be

less than seven years.

398.

Attempt to commit robbery or dacoity when armed with deadly weapon.

398. Attempt to commit robbery or dacoity when armed with deadly
weapon.--If, at the time of attempting to commit robbery or dacoity,
the offender is armed with any deadly weapon, the imprisonment with
which such offender shall be punished shall not’ be less than seven
years.

399.

Making preparation to commit dacoity.

399. Making preparation to commit dacoity.--Whoever makes any
preparation for committing dacoity, shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also
be liable to fine.

400.


Punishment for belonging to gang of dacoits.

400. Punishment for belonging to gang of dacoits.--Whoever, at
any time after the passing of this Act, sha belong to a gang of
persons associated for the purpose of habitually committing dacoity,
sha be punished with 1*[imprisonment for life], or with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also
be liable to fine.

401.

Punishment for belonging to gang of thieves.

401. Punishment for belonging to gang of thieves.-—-Whoever, at
any time after the passing of this Act, shall belong to any wandering
or other gang of persons associated for the purpose of habitually
committing theft or robbery, and not being a gang of thugs or dacoits,
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.

402.

Assembling for purpose of committing dacoity.

402. Assembling for purpose of committing dacoity.-——-Whoever, at
any time after the passing of this Act, shall be one of five or more
persons assembled for the purpose of committing dacoity, shall be
punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.

Of criminal misappropriation of property

403.

Dishonest misappropriation of property.

403. Dishonest misappropriation of property.-——-Whoever dishonestly
misappropriates or converts to his own use any movable property, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.

1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for
life."

192


Illustrations

(a) A takes property belonging to Z out of Z's possession in good
faith, believing, at th time when he takes it, that the property
belongs to himself. A is not guilty of theft; but if A, after
discovering his mistake, dishonestly appropriates the property to his
own use, he is guilty of an offence under this section.

(b) A, being on friendly terms with Z, goes into Z's library in
Z's absence and takes away a book without Z's express consent. Here,
if A was under the impression that he had Z's implied consent to take
the book for the purpose of reading it, A has not committed theft.
But, if A afterwards sells the book for his own benefit, he is guilty
of an offence under this section.

(c) A and B being joint owners of a horse, A takes the horse out
of B's possession, intending to use it. Here as A has a right to use
the horse, he does not dishonestly misappropriate it. But, if A sells
the horse and appropriates the whol proceeds to his own use, he is
guilty of an offence under this section.

Explanation 1.-A dishonest misappropriation for a time only is a
misappropriation with the meaning of this section.

Illustration

A finds a Government promissory note belonging to Z, bearing a
blank endorsement. A, knowing that the note belongs to Z, pledges it
with a banker as a security or a loan, intending at a future time to
restore it to Z. A has committed an offence under this section.

Explanation 2.-A person who finds property not in the possession
of any other person, and such property for the purpose of protecting
it for, or of restoring it to, the owner, does not take or
misappropriate it dishonestly, and is not guilty of an offence; but he
is guilty of th offence above defined, if he appropriates it to his
own use, when he knows or has the means of discovering the owner, or
before he has used reasonable means to discover and give notice to the
owner and has kept the property a reasonable time to enable the owner
to claim it.

What are reasonable means or what is a reasonable time in such a
case, is a question of fact.

It is not necessary that the finder should know who is the owner
of the property, or that any particular person is the owner of it: it
is sufficient if, at the time of appropriating it, he does not believe
it to be his own property, or in good faith believe that the real
owner cannot be found.

Illustrations

(a) A finds a rupee on the high-road, not knowing to whom the
rupee belong, A picks up th rupee. Her A has not committed the
offence defined in this section.



(bob) A finds a letter on the road, containing a bank note. From
the direction and contents of th letter he learns to whom the note
belongs. He appropriates th note. H is guilty of an offence under

this section.

(c) A finds a cheque payable to bearer. He can form no conjecture
as to the person who has lost the cheque. But the name of the person,
who has drawn the cheque, appears. A knows that this person can direct
him to the person in whose favour the cheque was drawn. A appropriates
the cheque without attempting to discover the owner. He is guilty of
an offence under this section.

193

(d) A sees Z drop his purse with money in it. A pick up the purse
with the intention of restoring it to Z, bu afterwards appropriates it
to his own use. A has committed an offence under this section.

(e) A finds a purse with money, not knowing to whom it belongs;
he afterwards discovers that it belongs to Z, and appropriates it to
his own use. A is guilty of an offence under this section.

(f) A finds a valuable ring, not knowing to whom it belongs. A
sells it immediately without attempting to discover the owner. A is
guilty of an offence under this section.

404.

Dishonest misappropriation of property possessed by deceased person at
the time of his death.

404. Dishonest misappropriation of property possessed by deceased
person at the time of his death.-Whoever dishonestly misappropriates
or converts to his own use property, knowing that such property was in
the possession of a deceased person at the time of that person's
decease, and has not since been in the possession of any person
egally entitled to such possession, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three years, and shall also be liable to fine, and if the offender at
the time of such person's decease was employed by him as a clerk or
servant, the imprisonment may extend to seven years.

Illustration

Z dies in possession of furniture and money. His servant A,
before th money comes into the possession of any person entitled to
such possession, dishonestly misappropriates it. A has committed the
offence defined in this section.

Of criminal breach of trust

405.


Criminal breach of trust.

405. Criminal breach of trust.--Whoever, being in any manner
entrusted with property, or with any dominion over property,
dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use that property,
or dishonestly uses or disposes of that property in violation of any
direction of law prescribing the mode in which such trust is to be
discharged, or of any legal contract, express or implied, which he has
made touching the discharge of such trust, or wilfully suffers any
other person so to do, commits "criminal breach of trust".

1*[2* [Explanation 1].-A person, being an employer 3* [of an
establishment whether xempted under section 17 of the Employees'
Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 (19 of 1952) or
not] who deducts the employees' contribution from the wages payable to
the employee for credit to a Provident Fund or Family Pension Fund
established by any law for the time being in force, sha be deemed to
have been entrusted with the amount of the contribution so deducted by
him and if he makes default in the payment of such contribution to the
said Fund in violation of the said law shall be deemed to have
dishonestly used the amount of the said contribution in violation of a
di

irection of law as aforesaid. |]

4* [Explanation 2.-A person, being an employer, who deducts the
employees contribution from the wages payable to the employee for
credit to the Employees' State Insurance Fund held and administered by
the Employees' State Insurance Corporation established under the
Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948 (34 of 1948), shall be deemed to
have been entrusted with the amount of the contribution so deducted by
him and if he makes default in the payment of such contribution to the

1. Ins. by Act 40 of 1973, s. 9 (w.e.f. 1-11-1973).

2. Explanation renumbered as Explanation 1 by Act 38 of 1975, s. 9
(w.e.f£. 1-9-1975).

3. Ins. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 27 (w.e.f. 1-8-1988).

4. Ins. by Act 38 of 1975, s. 9 (w.e.f. 1-9-1975).

194

said Fund in violation of the said Act, shall be deemed to have
dishonestly used the amount of the said contribution in violation of a
direction of law as aforesaid. ]

Illustrations

(a) A, being executor to the will of a deceased person,
dishonestly disobeys the law which directs him to divide the effects
according to the will, and appropriates them to his own use. A has
committed criminal breach of trust.

(b) A is a warehouse-keeper, Z, going on a journey, entrusts his
furniture to A, under a contract that it shall be returned on payment
of a stipulated sum for warehouse-room. A dishonestly sells the goods.
A has committed criminal breach of trust.



(c) A, residing in Calcutta, is agent for Z, residing at Delhi.
There is an express or implied contract between A and Z, that all sums
remitted by Z to A sha be invested by A, according to Z's direction.
Zremits a lakh of rupees to A, with directions to A to invest the
same in Company's paper. A dishonestly disobeys th directions and
employs the money in his own business. A has committed criminal breach
of trust.

(d) But if A, in the ast lustration, not dishonestly but in
good faith, believing that it wi be more for Z's advantage to hold
shares in the Bank of Bengal, disobeys Z's directions, and buys shares

in the Bank of Bengal,
thought Z should suffer
action against A, on
dishonestly,

for Z,

account of
has not committed criminal breac

instead of buyi
loss,
that loss,

(e) A, a revenu
ither directed by law,
with the Government, to
money which he holds.

com.

(f) A, a carrier,

406.

officer,

A dishonestly
mitted criminal breach of trust.

pay into a certain

and should be entitled to bring a civil

ng Company's paper, here,

yet A, not having acted

is entrusted with public money and
or bound by a contract,

appropriates the

h of trust.

is
express or implied,
treasury all the public
money. A has

is entrusted by Z with property to be carried
by land or by water. A dishonestly misappropriates the property. A has
committed criminal breach of trust.

Punishment for criminal breach of trust.

406. Punishment
criminal breach of trust
description for
or with both.

407.

Criminal breach of trust

407. Criminal
entrusted with
commits criminal
be punished w
may extend to seven years

property
breach

408.

Criminal breach of trust

for criminal

breach of

ith imprisonment

breach of

trust.--Whoever commits

shall be punished with imprisonment of either

a term which may extend to three years,

by carrier, etc.

trust by
as a carrier,

of trust,
of

e

1,

by clerk or servant.

carrier,
wharfinger or warehouse-keeper,
in respect of such property,
ither description for a term which
and shall also be liable to fine.

or with fine,

tc. b

Whoever, ing

shall



408. Criminal breach of trust by clerk or  servant.-—-Whoever,
being a clerk or servant or employed as a clerk or servant, and being
in any manner entrusted in such capacity with property, or with any
dominion over property, commits criminal breach of trust in respect of
that property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also
be liable to fine.

409.

Criminal breach of trust by public servant, or by banker, merchant or
agent.

409. Criminal breach of trust by public servant, or by banker,
merchant or agent.--Whoever, being in any manner entrusted with
property, or with any dominion over property in his capacity ofa
public servant or in the way of his business as a banker, merchant,
factor, broker, attorney or agent, commits criminal breach of trust in
respect of that property, shall be punished with 1* [imprisonment
for life], or with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.

1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for
life".

195

OF TE RECEIVING OF STOLEN PROPERTY

410.

Stolen property.

410. Stolen property.--Property, the possession whereof has been
transferred by theft, or by extortion, or by robbery, and property
which has been criminally misappropriated or in respect of which
1***criminal breach of trust has been committed, is designated as

"stolen property", 2*[whether the transfer has been made, or the
misappropriation or breach of trust has been committed, within or
without 3*[India]]. But, if such property subsequently comes into

the possession of a person legally entitled to the possession thereof,
it then ceases to be stolen property.

411.

Dishonestly receiving stolen property.


411. Dishonestly receiving stolen property.--Whoever dishonestly
receives or retains any stolen property,

believe th same to be stolen propert
imprisonment of either description for
three years, or with fine, or with both.

412.

Yr
a

knowing or having reason to
shall be punished with
term which may extend to

Dishonestly receiving property stolen in the commission of a dacoity.

412. Dishonestly receiving property stolen in the commission of a
dacoity.--Whoever dishonestly receives or retains any stolen property,
the possession whereof he knows or has reason to believe to have been

transferred by the commission of dacoity,

[e)

r dishonestly receives from

a person, whom he knows or has reason to believe to belong or to have
belonged to a gang of dacoits, property which he knows or has reason

to believe to have been stolen,

shall be punished with

4*[imprisonment for life], or with rigorous imprisonment for a term
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.

413.

Habitually dealing in stolen property.

413. Habitually dealing in stolen property.-——-Whoever habitually
receives or deals in property which he knows or has reason to believe
to be stolen property, sha be punished with 4*[imprisonment for
life], or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may

extend to ten years, and sha also be ]

Lab

e to fine.

414.

Assisting in concealment of stolen property.

414. Assisting in concealment o

f

stolen property.-—-—-Whoever

voluntarily assists in concealing or disposing of or making away with

property which he knows or has reason

to believe to be = stolen

property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description

for a term which may extend to three
both.

Of cheating

415.

ye

ars, or with fine, or with


Cheat

disho

any p
or in

ing.

415. Cheating.--Whoever, by deceiving any person, fraudulently or
nestly induces the person so deceived to deliver any property to
erson, or to consent that any person shall retain any property,
tentionally induces the person so deceived to do or omit to do

anything which he would not do or omit if he were not so deceived, and
which act or omission causes or is likely to cause damage or harm to
that person in body, mind, reputation or property, is said to "cheat".

withi

inten

Explanation.-A dishonest concealment of facts is a deception
n the meaning of this section.

Illustrations

(a) A, by falsely pretending to be in the Civil Service,
tionally deceives Z, and thus dishonestly induces Z to let him

have on credit goods for which he does not mean to pay. A cheats.

1. The words "the" and "offence of" rep. by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and
Sch. I and Act 8 of 1882, s. 9, respectively.

2. Ins. by Act 8 of 1882 s. 9.

3. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the States".

4. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for
life".

196

(b) A, by putting a counterfeit mark on an article, intentionally

deceives Z into a belief that this article was made by a certain
celebrated manufacturer, and thus dishonestly induces Z to buy and pay

for t

inten
with
the a

with which A keeps no money, and by which A expects that the bill will

be di
induc
cheat

diamo
to le

he article. A cheats.

(c) A, by exhibiting to Z a false sample of an article
tionally deceives Z into believing that the article corresponds
the sample, and thereby dishonestly induces Z to buy and pay for
rticle. A cheats.

(d) A, by tendering in payment for an article a bill on a house

shonoured, intentionally deceives Z, and thereby dishonestly
es Z to deliver the article, intending not to pay for it. A
s

(e) A, by pledging as diamond articles which he knows are not
nds, intentionally deceives Z, and thereby dishonestly induces Z
nd money. A cheats.

(£f) A Intentionally deceives Z into a belief that A means to

repay any money that Z may lend to him and thereby dishonestly induces

Z to

lend him money, A not intending to repay it. A cheats.

(g) A intentionally deceives 2Z into a belief that A means to

deliver to Za certain quantity of indigo plant which he does not


intend to deliver, and thereby dishonestly induces Z to advance money

upon the faith of such delivery. A cheats; but if A, at the time of
obtaining the money, intends to deliver the indigo plant, and
afterwards breaks his contract and does not deliver it, he does not
cheat, but is liable only to a civil action for breach of contract.

(h) A intentionally deceives Z into a belief that A has performed
A's part of a contract made with Z, which he has not performed, and
thereby dishonestly induces Z to pay money. A cheats.

(i) A sells and conveys an estate to B. A, knowing that in
consequence of such sale he has no right to the property, sells or
mortgages the same to 2Z, without disclosing the fact of the previous
sale and conveyance to B, and receives the purchase or mortgage money
from Z. A cheats.

416.

Cheating by personation.

416. Cheating by personation.--A person is said to "cheat by
personation" if he cheats by pretending to be some other person, or by
knowingly substituting one person for or another, or representing that
he or any other person is a person other than he or such other person
really is.

Explanation.-The offence is committed whether th individual
personated is a real or imaginary person.

Illustrations

(a) A cheats, by pretending to be a certain rich banker of the
same name. A cheats by personation.

(b) A cheats by pretending to be B, a person who is deceased. A
cheats by personation.

417.

Punishment for cheating.

417. Punishment for cheating.-Whoever cheats shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one
year, or with fine, or with both.

197

418.


Cheating with knowledge that wrongful loss may ensue to person whose
interest offender is bound to protect.

418. Cheating with knowledge that wrongful loss may ensue to
person whose interest offender is bound to protect.--Whoever cheats
with the knowledge that he is likely thereby to cause wrongful loss to
a person whose interest in the transaction to which the cheating
relates, he was bound either by law, or by legal contract, to
protect, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.

419.

Punishment for cheating by personation.

419. Punishment for cheating by personation.--Whoever cheats by
personation shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with
both.

420.

Cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of property.

420. Cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of property.--
Whoever cheats and thereby dishonestly induces the person deceived to
deliver any property to any person, or to make, alter or destroy the
whole or any part of a valuable security, or anything which is signed
or sealed, and which is capable of being converted into a valuable
security, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable
to fine.

Of fraudulent deeds and dispositions of property

421.

Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property to prevent
distribution among creditors.

421. Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property
to prevent distribution among creditors.--Whoever dishonestly or
fraudulently removes, conceals or delivers to any person, or transfers
or causes to be transferred to any person, without adequate
consideration, any property, intending thereby to prevent, or knowing
it to be likely that he will thereby prevent the distribution of that
property according to law among his creditors or the creditors of any



other person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or
with both.

422.

Dishonestly or fraudulently preventing debt being available for
creditors.

422. Dishonestly or fraudulently preventing debt being available
for creditors.--Whoever dishonestly or fraudulently prevents any debt
or demand due to himself or to any other person from being made
available according to law for payment of his debts or the debts of
such other person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or
with both.

423.

Dishonest or fraudulent execution of deed of transfer containing false
statement of consideration.

423. Dishonest or fraudulent execution of deed of transfer
containing false statement of consideration.-—-Whoever dishonestly or
fraudulently signs, executes or becomes a party to any deed or
instrument which purports to transfer or subject to any charge any
property, or any interest therein, and which contains any false
statement relating to the consideration for such transfer or charge,
or relating to the person or persons for whose use or benefit it is
really intended to operate, sha be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with
fine, or with both.

424.

Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property.

424. Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property.-
Whoever dishonestly or fraudulently conceals or removes any property
of himself or any other person, or dishonestly or fraudulently assists
in the concealment or removal thereof, or dishonestly releases any
demand or claim to which h is entitled, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two
years, or with fine, or with both.

Of mischief


425.

Mischief.

425. Mischief.--Whoever with intent to cause, or knowing that he
is likely to cause, wrongfu oss or damage to the public or to any
person, causes the destruction of any property, or any such change in
any property or in the situation thereof as destroys or diminishes its
value or utility, or affects it injuriously, commits "mischief".

198

Explanation 1.-It is not essential to the offence of mischief
that the offender should intend to cause loss or damage to the owner
of the property injured or destroyed. It is sufficient if he intends
to cause, or knows that he is likely to cause, wrongful loss or damage
to any person by injuring any property, whether it belongs to that
person or not.

Explanation 2.-Mischief may be committed by an act affecting
property belonging to the person who commits the act, or to that
person and others jointly.

Illustrations

(a) A voluntarily burns a valuable security belonging to 2
intending to cause wrongful loss to Z. A has committed mischief.

(b) A introduces water in to an ice-house belonging to Z and thus
causes th ice to melt, intending wrongful loss to Z. A has committed
mischief.

(c) A voluntarily throws into a river a ring belonging to Z, with
the intention of there by causing wrongful loss to Z. A has committed
mischief.

(d) A, knowing that his effects are about to be taken in
execution in order to satisfy a debt due from him to Z, destroys those
effects, with the intention of thereby preventing Z from obtaining
satisfaction of the debt, and of thus causing damage to Z. A has
committed mischief.

(e) A having insured a ship, voluntarily causes the same to b
cast away, with the intention of causing damage to the underwriters.
A has committed mischief.

(f) A causes a ship to be cast away, intending thereby to cause
damage to Z who has lent money on bottomry on the ship. A _ has
committed mischief.

(g) A, having joint property with Z in a horse, shoots the horse,
intending thereby to cause wrongful loss to Z. A has committed
mischief.

(h) A causes cattle to enter upon a field belonging to 2Z,



intending to cause and knowing that he is likely to cause damage to
Z's crop. A has committed mischief.

426.

Punishment for mischief.

426. Punishment for mischief.--Whoever commits mischief shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three months, or with fine, or with both.

427.

Mischief causing damage to the amount of fifty rupees.

427. Mischief causing damage to the amount of fifty rupees.--
Whoever commits mischief and thereby causes loss or damage to the
amount of fifty rupees or upwards, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for aterm which may extend to two years, or
with fine, or with both.

428.

Mischief by killing or maiming animal of the value of ten rupees.

428. Mischief by killing or maiming animal of the value of ten
rupees.-Whoever commits mischief by killing, poisoning, maiming or
rendering useless any animals or animal of the value of the ten rupees
or upwards, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.

429.

Mischief by killing or maiming cattle, etc., of any value or any
animal of the value of fifty rupees.

429. Mischief by ki ing or maiming cattle, etc., of any value or
any animal of the value of fifty rupees.--Whoever commits mischief by
killing, poisoning, maiming or rendering useless, any elephant, camel,
horse, mule, buffalo, bull, cow or ox, whatever may be the value
thereof, of any other animal of the value of fifty rupees or upwards,
sha be punished with imprisonment or either description for a term
which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both.

199


430.

Mischief by injury to works of irrigation or by wrongfully diverting
water.

430. Mischief by injury to works of irrigation or by wrongfully
diverting water.--Whoever commits mischief by doing any act which
causes, or which he knows to be likely to cause, a diminution of the
supply of water for agricultural purposes, or for food or drink for
human beings or for animals which are property, or for cleanliness or
for carrying on any manufacture, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to five years, or
with fine, or with both.

431.

Mischief by injury to public road, bridge, river or channel.

431. Mischief by injury to public road, bridge, river or
channel.--Whoever commits mischief by doing any act which renders or
which he knows to be likely to render any public road, bridge,
navigable river or navigable channel, natural or artificial,
impassable or less safe for travelling or conveying property, sha be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to five years, or with fine, or with both.

432.

Mischief by causing inundation or obstruction to public drainage
attended with damage.

432. Mischief by causing inundation or obstruction to public
drainage attended with damage.--Whoever commits mischief by doing any
act which causes or which he knows to be likely to cause an inundation
or an obstruction to any public drainage attended with injury or
damage, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both.

433.

Mischief by destroying, moving or rendering less useful a light—house
or sea-mark.

433. Mischief by destroying, moving or rendering less useful a


light-house or sea-mark.--Whoever commits mischief by destroying or
moving any light-house or other light used as a sea-mark, or any sea-
mark or buoy or other thing placed as a guide for navigators, or by
any act which renders any such light-house, sea-mark, buoy or other
such thing as aforesaid ess useful as a guide for navigators, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both.

434.

Mischief by destroying or moving, etc., a land-mark fixed by public
authority.

434. Mischief by destroying or moving, etc., a land-mark fixed by
public authority.--Whoever commits mischief by destroying or moving
any land-mark fixed by the authority of a public servant, or by any
act which renders such land-mark less useful as_ such, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.

435.

Mischief by fire or explosive substance with intent to cause damage to
amount of one hundred or (in case of agricultural produce) ten
rupees.

435. Mischief by fire or explosive substance with intent to cause
damage to amount of one hundred or (in case of agricultural produce)
ten rupees.-—-Whoever commits mischief by fire or any explosive
substance intending to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he wil
thereby cause, damage to any property to the amount of one hundred
rupees or upwards 1*[or (where the property is agricultura
produce) ten rupees or upwards], shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to seven years and
shall also be liable to fine.

436.

Mischief by fire or explosive substance with intent to destroy house,
etc.

436. Mischief by fire or explosive substance with intent to
destroy house, etc.--Whoever commits mischief by fire or any explosive
substance, intending to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will
thereby cause. the destruction of any building which is ordinarily
used as a place of worship or as a human dwelling or as a place for
the custody of property, shall be punished with 2*[imprisonment for
life], or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may



extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.

437.

Mischief with intent to destroy or make unsafe a decked vessel or one
of twenty tons burden.

437. Mischief with intent to destroy or make unsafe a decked
vessel or one of twenty tons burden.--Whoever commits mischief to any
decked vessel or any vessel of a burden of twenty tons or upwards,
intending to destroy or render unsafe, or knowing it to be likely that
he wi thereby destroy or render’ unsafe, that vessel, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.

1. Ins. by Act 8 of 1882, s. 10

2. Subs, by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch, for "transportation for
life".

200

438.

Punishment for the mischief described in section 437 committed by fire
or explosive substance.

438. Punishment for the mischief described in section 437
committed by fire or explosive substance.--Whoever commits, or
attempts to commit, by fire or any explosive substance, such mischief

as is described in the last preceding section. shall be punished with
1*[imprisonment for life]. or with imprisonment of either
description for aterm which may extend to ten years, and shall also
be liable to fine.

439.

Punishment for intentionally running vessel aground or ashore with
intent to commit theft, etc.

439. Punishment for intentionally running vessel aground or
ashore with intent to commit theft, etc.--Whoever intentionally runs
any vessel aground or ashore, intending to commit theft of any
property contained therein or to dishonestly misappropriate any such
property, or with intent that such theft or misappropriation of
property may be committed, = sha be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall
also be liable to fine.



440.

Mischief committed after preparation made for causing death or hurt.

440. Mischief committed after preparation made for causing death
or hurt.-- Whoever commits mischief, having made preparation for
causing to any person death, or hurt, or wrongful restraint, or fear
of death, or hurt, or of wrongful restraint, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five
years, and shall also be liable to fine.

Of criminal trespass

441.

Criminal trespass.

441. Criminal trespass.--Whoever enters into or upon property in
the possession of another with intent to commit an offence or to
intimidate, insult or annoy any person in possession of such property,

or having lawfully entered into or upon such property, unlawfully
remains there with intent thereby to intimidate, insult or annoy any
such person, or with intent to commit an offence,

is said to commit "criminal trespass".

442.

House-trespass.

442. House-trespass.—-—-Whoever commits criminal trespass by
entering into or remaining in any building, tent or vessel used as a
human dwelling or any building used as a place for worship, or as a
place for the custody of property, is said to commit "house-trespass".

Explanation.-The introduction of any part of the criminal
trespasser's body is entering sufficient to constitute house-trespass.

443.

Lurking house-trespass.

443. Lurking house-trespass.--Whoever commits house-trespass


having taken precautions to conceal such house-trespass from some
person who has a_ right to xclude or ject the trespasser from the
building, tent or vessel which is the subject of the trespass, is said
to commit "lurking house-trespass".

444,

Lurking house-trespass by night.

444, Lurking house-trespass by night.--Whoever commits lurking
house-trespass after sunset and before sunrise, is said to commit
"lurking house-trespass by night".

445.

House-breaking.

445. House-breaking.--A person is said to commit "house-breaking"
who commits house-trespass if he effects his entrance into the house
or any part of it in any of the six ways hereinafter described; or if,
being in the house or any part of it for the purpose of committing an
offence, or having committed an offence therein, he quits the house or
any part of it in any of it in such six ways, that is to say :-

First.-If he enters or quits through a passage made by himself,
or by any abettor of the house-trespass, in order to the committing of
the house-trespass.

1. Subs. by act. 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation
for life".

201

Secondly.-If he enters or quits through any passage not intended
by any person, other than himself or an abettor of the offence, for
human entrance; or through any passage to which he has obtained access
by scaling or climbing over any wall or building.

Thirdly.-If he enters or quits through any passage which he or
any abettor of the house-trespass has opened, in order to the
committing of the house-trespass by any means by which that passage
was not intended by the occupier of the house to be opened.

Fourthly.-If he enters or quits by opening any lock in order to
the committing of the house-trespass, or in order to the quitting of
the house after a house-trespass.

Fifthly.-If h ffects his entrance or departure by using
criminal force or committing an assault, or by threatening any person
with assault.



Sixthly.-If he enters or quits by any passage which he knows to
have been fastened against such entrance or departure, and to have
been unfastened by himself or by an abettor of the house-trespass.

Explanation.—-Any out-—house or building occupied with a house, and
between which and such house there is an immediate internal
communication, is part of the house within the meaning of this
section.

Illustrations

(a) A commits house-trespass by making a hole through the wall of
Z's house, and putting his hand through the aperture. This is house-
breaking.

(b) A commits house-trespass by creeping into a ship at a port-
hole between decks. This is house-breaking.

(c) A commits house-trespass by entering Z's house through a
window. This is house-breaking.

(d) A commits house-trespass by entering Z's house through the
door, having opened a door which was fastened. This is house-breaking.

(e) A commits house-trespass by entering Z's house through the
door, having lifted a latch by putting a wire through a hole in the
door. This is house-breaking.

(f) A finds the key of Z's house door, which Z had lost, and
commits house trespass by entering Z's house, having opened the door
with that key. This is house-breaking.

(g) 2 is standing in his doorway. A forces a passage by knocking
Z down, and commits house-trespass by entering the house. This is
house-breaking.

(h) Z, the door-keeper of Y, is standing in Y's doorway. A
commits house-trespass by entering the house, having deterred Z from
opposing him by threatening to beat him. This is house-breaking.

446.

House-breaking by night.

446. House-breaking by night.--Whoever commits house-breaking
after sunset and before sunrise, is said to commit "house-breaking by
night".

447.

Punishment for criminal trespass.


447, Punishment for criminal trespass.--Whoever commits criminal
trespass shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend
to five hundred rupees, or with both.

448.

Punishment for house-trespass.

448. Punishment for house-trespass.--Whoever commits house-
trespass shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to
one thousand rupees, or with both.

202

449.

House-trespass in order to commit offence punishable with death.

449, House-trespass in order to commit offence punishable with
death.--Whoever commits house-trespass in order to the committing of
any offence punishable with death, shall be punished with
1*[imprisonment for life], or with rigorous imprisonment for a term
not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.

450.

House-trespass in order to commit offence punishable with imprisonment
for life.

450. House-trespass in order to commit offence punishable with
imprisonment for life.--Whoever commits house-trespass in order to the
committing of any offence punishable with 1*[imprisonment for
life], shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.

451.

House-trespass in order to commit offence punishable with
imprisonment.

451. House-trespass in order to commit offence punishable with


imprisonment.--Whoever commits house-trespass in order to the
committing of any offence punishable with imprisonment, shall _ be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to two years, and shall also be liable to fine; and if the
offenc intended to be committed is theft, the term of the
imprisonment may be extended to seven years.

452.

House-trespass alter preparation for hurt, assault or wrongful
restraint.

452. House-trespass alter preparation for hurt, assault or
wrongful restraint.--Whoever commits house-trespass, having made
preparation for causing hurt to any person or for assaulting any
person, or for wrongfully restraining any person, or for putting and
person in fear of hurt, or of assault, or of wrongful restraint, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to seven years, and sha also be liable to fine.

453.

Punishment for lurking house-trespass or house-breaking.

453. Punishment for lurking house-trespass or house-breaking.--—
Whoever commits lurking house-trespass or house-breaking, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to two years, and shall also be liable to fine.

454.

Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking in order to commit offence
punishable with imprisonment.

454. Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking in order to commit
offence punishable with imprisonment.-—-Whoever commits lurking house-—
trespass or house-breaking, in order to the committing of any offence
punishable with imprisonment, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to three years, and
sha also be liable to fine; and if the offenc intended to be
committed is theft, the term of the imprisonment may be extended to
ten years.

455.

Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking after preparation for hurt,


assault or wrongful restraint.

455. Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking after preparation
for hurt, assault or wrongful restraint.--Whoever commits lurking
house-trespass, or house-breaking, having made preparation for causing
hurt to any person, or for assaulting any person, or for wrongfully
restraining any person, or for putting any person in fear of hurt or
of assault or of wrongful restraint, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description or a term which may extend to ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine.

456.

Punishment for lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by night.

456. Punishment for lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by
night.--Whoever commits lurking house-trespass by night, or house-
breaking by night, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also
be liable to fine.

457.

Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by night in order to commit
offence punishable with imprisonment.

457. Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by night in order
to commit offence punishable with imprisonment.--Whoever commits
lurking house-trespass by night, or house-breaking by night in order
to the committing of any offence punishable with imprisonment, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine; and, if
the offenc intended to be committed is theft, the term of the
imprisonment may be extended to fourteen years.

458.

Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by night after preparation
for hurt, assault, or wrongful restraint.

458. Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by night after
preparation for hurt, assault, or wrongful restraint.--Whoever commits
lurking house-trespass by night, or house-breaking by night, having
made preparation for causing hurt to any person or for assaulting any
person, or for wrongfully restraining any person, or for putting any
person in fear of hurt, or of assault, or of wrongful restraint, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which



may extend to fourteen years, and shall also be liable to fine.

1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for
life".

203

459.

Grievous hurt caused whilst committing lurking house-trespass or
house-breaking.

459. Grievous hurt caused whilst committing lurking house-
trespass or house-breaking.--Whoever, whilst committing lurking house-
trespass or house-breaking, causes grievous hurt to any person or

attempts to cause death or grievous hurt to any person, = sha be
punished with 1*[imprisonment for life], or imprisonment of either
description for aterm which may extend to ten years, and shall also

be liable to fine.

460.

All persons jointly concerned in lurking house-trespass or house-
breaking by night punishable where death or grievous hurt caused by
one of them.

460. All persons jointly concerned in lurking house-trespass or
house-breaking by night punishable where death or grievous hurt caused
by one of them.--If at the time of the committing of lurking house-
trespass by night or house-breaking by night, any person guilty of
such offence shall voluntarily cause or attempt to cause death or
grievous hurt to any person, every person jointly concerned in
committing such urkking house-trespass by night or house-breaking by
night, shall be punished with 1*[imprisonment for life], or with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine.

461.

Dishonestly breaking open receptacle containing property.

461. Dishonestly breaking open receptacle containing property.--
Whoever dishonestly or with intent to commit mischief, breaks open or
unfastens any closed receptacle which contains or which he believes to
contain property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or
with both.



462.

Punishment for same offenc when committed by person entrusted with
custody.

462. Punishment for sam offenc when committed by person
entrusted with custody.--Whoever, being ntrusted with any closed
receptacle which contains or which he believes to contain property
without having authority to open the same, dishonestly, or with intent
to commit mischief, breaks open or unfastens that receptacle, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.

CHAPTER XVIII

E

OF OFFENCES RELATING TO DOCUMENTS AND TO PROPERTY MARKS

CHAPT

eal

R XVIII

OF OFFENCES RELATING TO DOCUMENTS AND TO 2****PROPERTY MARKS

463.

Forgery.

463. Forgery.--Whoever makes any false document or part of a
document with intent to cause damage or injury, to the public or to
any person, or to support any claim or title, or to cause any person
to part with property, or to enter into any express or implied
contract, or with intent to commit fraud or that fraud may be
committed, commits forgery.

464.

Making a false document.

464. Making a false document.--A person is said to make a false
document—

First.-Who dishonestly or fraudulently makes, signs, seals or
executes a document or part of a document, or makes any mark denoting
the execution of a document, with the intention of causing it to be
believed that such document or part of a document was made, signed,
sealed or executed by or by the authority of a person by whom or by



whose authority he knows that it was not made, signed, sealed or
executed, or at a time at which he knows that it was not made, signed,
sealed or executed; or

Secondly.-—Who, without lawful authority, dishonestly or
fraudulently, by cancellation or otherwise, alters a document in any
material part thereof, after it has been made or executed either by
himself or by any other person, whether such person be living or dead
at the time of such alteration; or

Thirdly.-Who dishonestly or fraudulently causes any person to

sign, seal, xecute or alter a document, knowing that such person by
reason of unsoundness of mind or intoxication cannot, or that by
reason of deception practised upon him, he does not know the contents

of the document or the nature of the alteration.

1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for
life".
2. The words "Trade or" omitted by Act 43 of 1958, s. 135 and Sch.

(w.e.f£. 25-11-1959).

204
Illustrations

(a) A has a letter of credit upon B for rupees 10,000, written by
Z. A, in order to defraud B, adds cipher to the 10,000, and makes the
sum 1,00,000 intending that it may be believed by B that Z so wrote
the letter. A has committed forgery.

(ob) A without Z's authority, affixes Z's seal to a document
purporting to be a conveyance of an estate from Z to A, with the
intention of selling the estate to B and thereby of obtaining from B
the purchase-money. A has committed forgery.

(c) A picks up a cheque ona banker signed by B, payable to
bearer, but without any sum having been inserted in the cheque. A
fraudulently fills up the cheque by inserting the sum of ten thousand
rupees. A commits forgery.

(d) A leaves with B, his agent, a cheque on a banker, signed by
A, without inserting the sum payable and authorizes B to fill up the
cheque by inserting a sum not exceeding ten thousand rupees for the
purpose of making certain payments. B fraudulently fills up the cheque
by inserting the sum of twenty thousand rupees. B commits forgery.

(e) A draws a bill of exchange on himself in the name of B
without B's authority, intending to discount it as a genuine bill with
a banker and intending to take up the bill on its maturity. Here, as A
draws the bi with intent to deceive the banker by leading him to
suppose that he had the security of B, and thereby to discount the
bill, A is guilty of forgery.

(f£) Z's will contains these words-"I direct that a my remaining
property be equally divided between A, B and C." A _ dishonestly
scratches out B's name, intending that it may be believed that the



whole was left to himself and C. A has committed forgery.

(g)

to Z< for his

order"
"Pay to

an

into a blank endorsement.

A

d
Z

endorses a Government promissory note and
order by writing on the bill

endorsement.
and thereby

signing the
or his order",

makes it payable
"Pay to Z or his
rases the words
cial endorsement

the words
B  dishonestly
converts the sp

B commits forgery.

(h) A sells and conveys an estate to Z. A afterwards, in order to
defraud Z of his state, xecutes a conveyance of the sam state to
B, dated six months earlier than the date of the conveyance to Z,
intending it to be believed that he had conveyed th state to B
before he conveyed it to Z. A has committed forgery.

(i) 2 dictates his will to A. A intentionally writes down a
different legat named by 2Z, and by representing to Z that he has
prepared the will according to his instructions, induces Z to sign the
will. A has committed forgery.

(j) A writes a letter and signs it with B's name without B's
authority, certifying that A is a man of good character and in
distressed circumstances from unforeseen misfortune, intending by
means of such letter to obtain alms from Z and other persons. Here, as
A made a false document in order to induce Z to part with property, A

has committed forgery.

(k)
name

deceive Z

A

certifying
employment under Z. A has committed forgery

without B's authority wr

to A's

by the forged certificate,

character,

tes a
intending

letter and signs it in B's
thereby to obtain
inasmuch as he intended to
and thereby to induce Z to enter

into an express or implied contract for service.

205
Explanation I.-A man's signature
forgery.
Illustrati
(a) A signs his own name to a bil
may be believed that the bill was draw

name. A has committed forgery.

(b)
with Z's
bill of

the fact,

(c)

different person
intending to cause
person to whose order it

name,

(d)
against B

A writes the word "accepted" o

name,
exchange drawn by B upon Z,
it had been accepted by Z. A is guilty of forgery;

A

A

in order that B may

draws the

bill upon the paper pursuant to A's
is also guilty of forgery.

of his own name may amount to
Lons
ll of exchange, intending that it

n by another person of the same

na piece of paper and signs it
afterwards write on the paper a

and negotiate the bills as though
and if B, knowing
intention, B

picks up a bill of exchange payable to the order of a
of th same nam A endorses the bill in his own
it to be believed that it was endorsed by the

was payable;

estate sold
seizur of

purchases an
B, after th

here A has committed forgery.

of a decree
in collusion with Z,

under execution
the estate,



executes a lease of

the estate to Z at a nominal rent and for a long

lease six to the

period and dates th

intent to defraud A,

months prior

seizure,

with

and to cause it to be believed that the lease was

seizur

xecutes th

granted before th
name,

(e)
ith B

A,

inding himself
he note,
as on the point
irst

me tors

commits forgery by antedati

a trader,

for A's benefit
n order to give a col
to pay

intending that
of insolvency.
head of the definition.

Explanation 2.-The
intendi

leas

in his own

B, though h
ng it.

in anticipation of insolvency,

to B a sum for value received,

lodges effects
, and with intent to defraud his creditors;
lour to the transaction,

and

writes a promissory note
and antedates
n made before A

it may be believed to have b
A has

making of a false

ictious person,
ade by real person,
believed that
ifetime,

A draws a
fraudulently accepts

or

the document
may amount to forgery.

bill
the bill

ng it to be believed that
in the name of a deceased person,
was made by the

Illustration

of exchange fictious

in the

upon a

with intent to negotiate it. A commits forgery.

465.

Punishment for forgery.

465. Punishment
punished with
extend to two years,

466.

Forgery of record of Court or of public register,

466. Forgery
Whoever forges
or
burial, or
certificate or
his official

of attorney,
for a term which
to fine.

206

for forgery.——-Whoever
imprisonment of either description for a term which may

or

of record
a document,
in a Court of Justice,
a register
document purporting
capacity,
or to take any proceedings therein,
shall be punished with
may extend to seven years,

with fine, or with both.

etc.

committed forgery

person

person,
name of such fictitious person

commits forgery

under the

document in the name of a
the document was

it
is

intending
in h

and

shall be

tc.

of Court or of

kept by a public servant as

public register,
purporting to be a record or proceeding of
or a register of birth, baptism,

marriage or
such, or a

to be made by a public servant in

or an authority to institute or defend a suit,

or to confess judgment,
imprisonment of either descr
and shall also be

or a power
iption
liable



467.

Forgery of valuable security, will, etc.

467. Forgery of valuable security, will, etc.--Whoever forges a
document which purports to be a valuable security or a will, or an
authority to adopt a son, or which purports to give authority to any
person to make or transfer any valuable security, or to receive the
principal, interest or dividends thereon, or to receive or deliver any
money, movable property, or valuable security, or any document
purporting to be an acquittance or receipt acknowledging the payment

of money, or an acquittance or receipt for the delivery of any movable
property or valuable security, shall be punished with 1
*fimprisonment for ife], or with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
468.

Forgery for purpose of cheating.

468. Forgery for purpose of cheating.--Whoever commits forgery,
intending that the document forged shall be used for the purpose of
cheating, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable
to fine.

469.

Forgery for purpose of harming reputation.

469. Forgery for purpose of harming reputation.--Whoever commits
forgery, intending that the document forged shall harm the reputation
of any party, or knowing that it is likely to be used for that
purpose, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to
fine.

470.

Forged document.

470. Forged document.--A false document made wholly or in part by
forgery is designated "a forged document".


471.

Using as genuine a forged document.

471. Using as genuine a forged document.--Whoever fraudulently or
dishonestly uses as genuine any document which he knows or has reason
to believe to be a forged document, shall be punished in the same
manner as if he had forged such document.

472.

Making or possessing counterfeit seal, etc., with intent to commit
forgery punishable under section 467.

472. Making or possessing counterfeit seal, etc., with intent to
commit forgery punishable under section 467.--Whoever makes or
counterfeits any seal, plate or other instrument for making an
impression, intending that the same sha be used for the purpose of
committing any forgery which would be punishable under section 467 of
this Code, or, with such intent, has in his possession any such seal,
plate or other instrument, knowing the same to be counterfeit, shall
be punishable with 1*[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and
shall also be liable to fine.

473.

Making or possessing counterfeit seal, etc., with intent to commit
forgery punishable otherwise.

473. Making or possessing counterfeit seal, etc., with intent to
commit forgery punishable otherwise.--Whoever makes or counterfeits
any seal, plate or other instrument for making an impression,
intending that the same shall be used for the purpose of committing
any forgery which would be punishable under any section of this
Chapter other than section 467, or, with such intent, has in his
possession any such seal, plate or other instrument, knowing the same
to be counterfeit, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also
be liable to fine.

474.

Having possession of document described in section 466 or 467, knowing
it to be forged and intending to use it genuine.


4

has in his

74. Having possession of document des
467, knowing

intending that the same

genuine, shall, if the doc

section 466

descri

be liable

of this Code

it to be forged and intending to
possession any document, knowing t

, be punished with

cribed

in section 466 or

use it
he sam

genuine.-——-Whoever

impris

to be forged, and

shall fraudulently or dishonestly be used as
ument is one of the description mentioned in

onment of either

ption for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also

mentioned in

for

fe],

to fine; andi

or with impri

section 467,

f the document is
shall be punis

one of
hed wit

the description
h 1* [imprisonment

sonment of either description, for a term
which may extend to seven years, and shall al

so be li

able to fine.

1. S
1

207

475.

ubs. by Act 26 of 1955. s. 117 and Sch.

ife".

Counterfeiting device or
described in section 467,

4

mark used for

, for "t

authenti

ransportation for

cating documents

or possessing counterfeit marked material.

75. Counterfeiting device or mark
documents described in se

materi

materi

any do

cument

such device

appearance of

to be

device

for a
to fin

476.

Counterfeiting device

than t
materi

4
docume
counte
substa
authen
sectio
used f
docume

described in
or mark shal
authenticit

forged on such mat
possession any material u
or mark has’ been
*[imprisonment for life],
term which may ext

e.

used fo

r authenticating

ction 467, or possessing counterfeit marked
al.--Whoever counterfeits upon, or in
al, any device or

the su

bstance of, any

mark used for the purpose of authenticating

section 467 of t
1 be used for the

his Cod
purpose

e, intending that
of giving the

y to any document then forged or thereafter

erial, or who, wit
pon or in the sub
counterfeited, sha
or with imprisonme
end to seven years,

h such i
stance
ll be
nt of e
and sha

ntent, has in his
of which any such
punished with 1
ither description
1l also be liable

or mark used for authenticating documents other
or possessing counterfeit marked

r authenticating

upon, or in the

ts described in

hose described in section 467,

al.

76. Counterfeiting device or mark used _ fo

nts other than those described in section 467, or possessing
rfeit marked material.--Whoever counterfeits

nce of, any material, any device or mark used for the purpose of
ticating any document other than the documen

n 467 of this Code, intending that such device or mark shall be
or the purpose of giving the appearance of authenticity to any
nt then forged or

thereafter to be forged on such material, or


who with

such intent,

has in

his possession any material upon or in

the substance of which any such device or mark has been counterfeited,

shall be
which may extend

477.

Fraudulent cancellation,

adopt,

477.
authority to
dishonestly,
to any person,
destroy or
which is
any valuable
document,
imprisonment of
seven years, and

477A.

Falsification of

2*[477A. Fal
officer or serva
officer or serva
alters, mutilates
security or acco
employer, or has
employer, or wil

punished with

Fraudulent
adopt,
or w
cancels,

deface,
or purports to be a will
security,
shall be punished with

to seven years,

or

ith

or secretes oO

or

either descripti

destruction,
or valuable security.

cancellation,
valuable security.-——-Whoever
intent to cause damage or
destroys or

xr

1,

commits

etc., fe)

destruct

defaces,
attempts t

or an authority to adopt a son,
such

mischief

f will,

ion, etc., of

authority

wil
fraudulently

injury to the public
or attempts to cancel,

imprisonment of either description for a term
and shall also be liable to fine.

to

oat
or
or

o secrete any document

in respect of

1* [imprisonment for
on

for a ter

shall also be liable to fine.

accounts.

sification
nt, or
nt, willfu
or falsif
unt which
been
fully, and

Yr a
ies a

with i

making of any fal
or alteration of
paper, writing,
imprisonment of
seven years,

Explanation.
section to alleg
particular perso
particular sum o

Va

or with fine,

se entry in, or o
any
luable security

either descriptio

-It shall
ea
n intended
f money

to

of accounts.
employed or acting

n

be sufficient
general intent

intended to

ny book,
belongs to
received by hi

Who

life], or

m which

int

pap
or
m

for

ntent to defraud,
mits or alter
material particular

or account,
for a

or with both.

ina
to defrau

be defraud

from or

term which

ver, being a c

may extend

he capacity of a cl

er, writing,

or on behalf of

abets
in.

Ss or

sha

ny charge under
d without naming
ed or specifying

be the subject of the fraud,

any particular day on which the offence was committed. ]

478.

[Repealed. ]

3* [Of 4****property and other marks

or

with

to

lerk,
lerk,
nd with intent to defraud, destroys,
valuable
is in the possession of his
h
makes or abets the
the omission
any such book,
be punished with

may extend

is

to

this
any
any

or


478. [Trade Mark.] Rep. by the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act,
1958 (43 of 1958),s. 135 and Sch. (w. e. £. 25-11-1959).

1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for
life".

2. Added by Act 3 of 1895, s. 4.

3. Subs. by Act. 4 of 1889, s. 3, for the original heading and ss.
478 to 489.

4. The word "trade," omitted by Act 43 of 1958, s. 135 and Sch.

(w.e.f£. 25-11-1959).

208

479.

Property mark.

1*479. Property mark.--A mark used for denoting that movable
property belongs to a particular person is called a property mark.

480.

[Repealed. ]

480. [Using a false trade mark.] Rep. by the Trade and
Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (43 of 1958), s. 135 and Sch. (w.e.f. 25-
11-1959).

481.

Using a false property mark.

481. Using a false property mark.--Whoever marks any movable
property or goods or any case, package or other receptacle containing
movable property or goods, or uses any case, package or other
receptacle having any mark thereon, in a manner reasonably calculated
to cause it to be believed that the property or goods so marked, or
any property or goods contained in any such receptacle so marked,
belong to a person to whom they do not belong, is said to use a false
property mark.

482.


Punishment for using a false property mark.

482. Punishment for using a false property mark.--Whoever uses
1***any false property mark shall, unless he proves that he acted
without intent to defraud, be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or
with both.

483.

Counterfeiting a property mark used by another.

483. Counterfeiting a property mark used by another.--Whoever
counterfeits any 3****property mark used by any other person shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.

484.

Counterfeiting a mark used by a public servant.

484. Counterfeiting amark used by a public servant.--Whoever
counterfeits any property mark used by a public servant, or any mark
used by a public servant to denote that any property has been
manufactured by a particular person or at a particular time or place,
or that the property is of a particular quality or has passed through
a particular office, or that it is entitled to any exemption, or uses
as genuine any such mark knowing the same to be counterfeit, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.

485.

Making or possession of any instrument for counterfeiting a property
mark.

4*[485. Making or possession of any instrument for
counterfeiting a property mark.-—-Whoever makes or has in his
possession any die, plate or other instrument for the purpose of
counterfeiting a proper mark, or has in his possession a property mark
for the purpose of denoting that any goods belong to a person to whom
they do not belong, sha be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine,
or with both. ]

486.


Selling goods marked with a counterfeit property mark.

486. Selling goods marked with a counterfeit property mark.--
5*[Whoever sells, or exposes, or has in possession for sale, any goods
or things with a counterfeit property mark] affixed to or impressed
upon the same or to or upon any case, package or other receptacle in
which such goods are contained, shall, unless he proves

1. Ss. 147 to 489 were subs. by Act 4 of 1889, for the original
sections.

2. The words "any false trade mark or" omitted by Act 43 of 1958, s.
135 and Sch. (w.e.f. 25-11-1959).

3. The words "trade mark or" omitted by s. 135 and Sch., ibid.
(w.e.f. 25-11-1959).

4. Subs. by s. 135 and Sch., ibid., for the former section (w.e.f
25-11-1959).

5. Subs. by s. 135 and Sch., ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 25-11-
1959).

209

(a) that, having taken all reasonable precautions against
committing an offence against this section, he had at the time of
the commission of th alleged offenc no reason to suspect the
genuineness of the mark, and

(b) that, on demand made by or on behalf of the prosecutor,
he gave all the information in his power with respect to the
persons from whom he obtained such goods or things, or

(c) that otherwise he had acted innocently,

be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.

487.

Making a false mark upon any receptacle containing goods.

487. Making a false mark upon any receptacle containing goods.--—
Whoever makes any false mark upon any case, package or other
receptacle containing goods, in amanner reasonably calculated to
cause any public servant or any other person to believe that such
receptacle contains goods which it does not contain or that it does
not contain goods which it does contain, or that the goods contained
in such receptacle are of a nature or quality different from the real
nature or quality thereof, shall, unless he proves that he acted
without intent to defraud, be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine,
or with both.



488.

Punishment for making use of a

488.
makes use
foregoing section shall,
to defraud, be punished as
section.

Punishment for maki

ng

if

489.

Tampering with property mark wit

489. Tampering
Whoever removes,
intending or
to any person,
description for
with both.]

with property
destroys, defa
knowing
shall

be pu

use

mark w
ces

nished

a term which may extend to one year,

or adds
it to be likely that he may thereby cause injury

ny such false mark.

of any such false mark.-——-Whoever

of any such false mark in any manner prohibited by the last
unless he proves that he acted without intent
he had committed an offence against that

h intent to cause injury.

ith intent to cause injury.--

to any property mark,
with imprisonment of either
or with fine, or

1* [Of currency-notes and bank-notes

489A.

Counterfeiting currency-notes or bank-notes.

489A. Counterfeiting
counterfeits, or knowingly per
counterfeiting,
2*[imprisonment for
description for a term
be liable to fine.

ife], or

Explanation.-For the
489B, 3*[489C,
promissory not

purpo
489D and 489E],
or engagement

currency-notes

forms

any currency-note or bank-note,

wi

which may extend to ten years,

ses of
the
for th

bank-—notes.——-Whoever
of the process of
shall be punished with
of either
and shall also

or
any part

th imprisonment

this section and of sections
expression "bank-note" means a
e payment of money to bearer on

demand issued by any person carrying on the business of banking in any

part of the world, or
Sovereign Power, and
substitute for money.

intended

489B.

Using as genuine,

to be

issued by or under the authority of any State or

used as equivalent to, or as a

forged or counterfeit currency-notes or bank-notes.


489B. Using as genuine, forged or counterfeit currency-notes or
bank-notes.--Whoever sells to, or buys or receives from, any other
person, or otherwise traffics in or uses as genuine, any forged or
counterfeit currency-note or bank-note, knowing or having reason to
believe the same to be forged or counterfeit, sha be punished with 2
*fimprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to
fine.

1. Ss. 489A to 489D were ins. by Act 12 of 1899, s. 2

2. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for
life".

3. Subs. by Act 35 of 1950, s. 3 and Sch., II, for "489C and 489D".

210

489C.

Possession of forged or counterfeit currency-notes or bank-note.

489C. Possession of forged or counterfeit currency-notes or bank-
notes.-Whoever has in his possession any forged or counterfeit
currency-note or bank-note, knowing or having reason to believe the
same to be forged or counterfeit and intending to use the same as
genuine or that it may be used as’ genuine, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, or with fine, or with both.

489D.

Making or possessing instruments or materials for forging or
counterfeiting currency notes or bank-notes.

489D. Making or possessing instruments or materials for forging
or counterfeiting currency notes or bank-notes.--Whoever makes, or
performs any part of the process of making, or buys of sells or
disposes of, or has in his possession, any machinery, instrument of
material for the purpose of being used, or knowing or having reason to

believe that it is intended to be used, for forging or counterfeiting
any currency-note or bank-note, shall be punished with 1
*fimprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to

fine.]

489

ira)



Making or using documents rese

mbling currency-notes or bank-notes.

2*[489E. Making or using documents resembling currency-notes
or bank-notes.--(1) Whoever makes, or causes to be made, or uses for
any purpose whatsoever, or delivers to any person, any document

purporting to be, or in any wa
to be calculated to deceive,
punished with fine which may e

(2) If any person, whose

y resembling, or so nearly resembling as
any currency-note or bank-note shall be
xtend to one hundred rupees.

name appears on a document the making of

which is an offenc under su
excuse, to disclose to a poli
and address of the person by w
shall be punished with fine wh

(3) Wher the nam of a
respect of which any person
section (1) or on any other do
with that document it may, u
that that person caused the do

CHAPTER XIX

b-section (1), refuses, without lawful
ce-officer on being so required the nam
hom it was printed or otherwise made, h
ich may extend to two hundred rupees.

ny person appears on any document in
is charged with an offenc under sub
cument used or distributed in connection
ntil the contrary is proved, be presumed
cument to be made. ]

OF THE CRIMINAL BREACH OF CONT

OF THE CRIMINA

490.

490. [Preach of contract
Rep. by the Workmen's Breach
1925), s. 2 and Sch.

491.

RACTS OF SERVICE

CHAPT!

GI

R XIX

L BREACH OF CONTRACTS OF SERVICE

of service during voyage or journey. ]
of Contract (Repealing) Act, 1925 (3 of

Breach of contract to attend on and supply wants of helpless person.

491. Breach of contract to attend on and supply wants of helpless

person.--Whoever, being bound

by a lawful contract to attend on or to

supply the wants of any person who, by reason of youth, or of

unsoundness of mind, or of a

disease or bodily weakness, is helpless

or incapable of providing for his own safety or of supplying his own

wants, voluntarily omits so to

do, shall be punished with imprisonment

of either description for a term which may extend to three months, or
with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, or with both.



492.

492. [Breach of contract to serve at distant place to which
servant is conveyed at master's expense.] Rep. by the Workmen's Breach
of Contract (Repealing) Act, 1925 (3 of 1925), s. 2 and Sch.

1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for
life".

2. S. 489E was ins. by Act 6 of 1943, s. 2.

211

CHAPTER XX

OF OFFENCES RELATING TO MARRIAG

Gl

CHAPTER XX

OF OFFENCES RELATING TO MARRIAG

Gl

493.

Cohabitation caused by a man deceitfully inducing a belief of lawful
marriage.

493. Cohabitation caused by aman deceitfully inducing a belief
of lawful marriage.--Every man who by deceit causes any woman who is
not lawfully married to him to believe that she is lawfully married to
him and to cohabit or have sexual intercourse with him in that belief,
sha be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term

which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.

494,

Marrying again during lifetime of husband or wife.

494. Marrying again during lifetime of husband or wife.-——-Whoever,
having a husband or wife living, marries in any case in which such
marriage is void by reason of its taking place during the life of such
husband or wife, sha be punished with imprisonment of either

description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also
be liable to fine.

Exception.-This section does not extend to any person whose


marriage with such husband or wife has been declared void by a Court
of competent jurisdiction,

nor to any person who contracts a marriage during the life of a
former husband or wife, if such husband or wife, at the time of the
subsequent marriage, shall have been continually absent from_ such
person for the space of seven years, and shall not have been heard of
by such person as being alive within that time provided the person
contracting such subsequent marriage shall, before such marriage takes
place, inform the person with whom such marriage is contracted of the
real state of facts so far as the same are within his or her
knowledge.

495.

Same offence with concealment of former marriage from person with whom
subsequent marriage is contracted.

495. Same offence with concealment of former marriage from person
with whom subsequent marriage is contracted.--Whoever commits the
offence defined in the last preceding section having concealed from
the person with whom the subsequent marriage is contracted, the fact
of the former marriage, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for aterm which may extend to ten years, and shall also
be liable to fine.

496.

Marriage ceremony fraudulently gone through without lawful marriage.

496. Marriage ceremony fraudulently gone through without lawful
marriage.--Whoever, dishonestly or with a fraudulent intention, goes
through the ceremony of being married, knowing that he is not thereby
lawfully married, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also
be liable to fine.

497.

Adultery.

497. Adultery.--Whoever has sexual intercourse with a person who
is and whom he knows or has reason to believe to be the wife of
another man, without the consent or connivance of that man, such
sexual intercourse not amounting to the offence of rape, is guilty of
the offence of adultery, and shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to five years, or with
fine, or with both. In such case the wife shall not be punishable as



an abettor.

498.
Enticing or taking away or detaining with criminal intent a married
woman.

498. Enticing or taking away or detaining with criminal intent a
married woman.--Whoever takes or entices away any woman who is and
whom he knows or has reason to believe to be the wife of any other
man, from that man, or from any person having the care of her on
behalf of that man, with intent that she may have illicit intercourse

with any person, or conceals or detains with that intent any such
woman, Shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.

CHAPT

eal

R XXA

OF CRUELTY BY HUSBAND OR RELATIVES OF HUSBAND

1* [CHAPTER XXA

OF CRUELTY BY HUSBAND OR RELATIVES OF HUSBAND

498A.

Husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting her to cruelty.

498A. Husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting her to
cruelty.--Whoever, being the husband or the relative of the husband of
a woman, subjects such woman to cruelty shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also
be liable to fine.

1. Chapter XXA inserted by Act 46 of 1983, s. 2.

212

Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, "cruelty" means-—

(a) any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is
ikely to drive the woman to commit suicide or to cause grave
injury or danger to life, limb or health (whether mental or
physical) of the woman; or

(b) harassment of the woman where such harassment is with a
view to coercing her or any person related to her to meet any
unlawful demand for any property or valuable security or is on



account of failure by her or any person related to her to meet
such demand. ]

CHAPTER XXI

OF DEFAMATION

CHAPTER XXI

OF DEFAMATION

499.

Defamation.

499. Defamation.--Whoever by words either spoken or intended to
be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes
any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or
having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the
reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter
excepted, to defame that person.

Explanation 1.-It may amount to defamation to impute anything to
a deceased person, if the imputation would harm the reputation of that
person if living, and is intended to be hurtful to the fellings of his
family or other near relatives.

Explanation 2.-It may amount to defamation to make an imputation
concerning a company or an association or collection of persons as
such.

Explanation 3.-An imputation in the form of an alternative or
expressed ironically, may amount to defamation.

Explanation 4.-No imputation is said to harm a person's
reputation, unless that imputation directly or indirectly, in the
estimation of others, lowers the moral or intellectual character of
that person, or lowers the character of that person in respect of his
caste or of his calling, or lowers the credit of that person, or
causes it to be believed that the body of that person is in a lothsome
state, or in a state generally considered as disgraceful.

Illustrations

(a) A  says-"Z is an honest man; he never stole B's. watch",
intending to cause it to be believed that Z did steal B's watch. This
is defamation, unless it fall within one of the exceptions.

(ob) A is asked who stole B's watch. A points to Z, intending to
cause it to be believed that 2Z stole B's watch. This is defamation,
unless it fall within one of the exceptions.



(c) A draws a_pictu
intending it to be beli

re of Z running

away with B's’ watch,

eved that 2 stole B's watch. This is

defamation, unless it fal

First Exception.-Imput
to be made or published.-
which is true concerning an
the imputation should be
the public good is a questi

213

Second Exception.-—Publ
defamation to express in
the conduct of a public s

functions, or respecting hi

within one of the exceptions.

ation of truth which public good requires
It is not defamation to impute anything

y person, if it be
made or published.
on of fact.

ervant in the d
s character, so

appears in that conduct, an

Third Exception.-Cond

whatever respecting the co
question, and respecting h
appears in that conduct, an

It is not defamation
whatever resepting Z's con

in presiding or attending
society which invites the

dno further.

for the public good that
Whether or not it is for

ic conduct of public servants.-It is not
good faith any opi

nion whatever respecting

ischarge of his public

far as his character

uct of any person touching any public
question. -It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion
nduct of any person touching any public

is character, so
dno further.

Illustration

in A to express

far as his character

in good faith any opinion

duct in petitioning Government on a public
question, in signing a requisition for a meeting on a public question,

at such meeting,
public support, in

in forming or joining any

voting or canvassing for

a particular candidate for any situation in the efficient discharge of

the duties of which the pub

Fourth Exception.-—-Pub

c is interested.

Lcation of reports of proceedings of

courts- It is not defamation to publish a substantially true report of
t of Justice, or of the result of any such

the proceedings of a Cour
proceedings.

Explanation.-A Justice

of the Peace or

other officer holding an

enquiry in open Court preliminary to a trial in a Court of Justice, is
a Court within the meaning of the above section.

Fifth Exception.—-Merit
itnesses and others conce
ood faith any opinion wh
ivil or criminal, which

Toe*RK AQ SE

is character appears in th

(a) A says-"I thin
contradictory that he must
exception if he says this i

s of case decided in Court or conduct of
rned. It is not defamation to express in

atever respecting

the merits of any case,

has been decided by a Court of Justice, or

at conduct, and no

Illustrations

k Z's evidence

especting the conduct of any person as a party, witness or agent, in
ny such case, or respecting the character of such person, as far as

further.

on that tria is so

be stupid or dishonest." A is within this
n good faith, inasmuch as the opinion which



h xpresses respects Z's character as it appears in Z's conduct as a
witness, and no farther.

(b) But if A says-"I do not believe what Z asserted at that trial
because I know him to be a man without veracity"; A is not within this
exception, inasmuch as the opinion which expresses of Z's character,
is an opinion not founded on Z's conduct as a witness.

Sixth Exception.—-Merits of public performance.-It is not
defamation to express in good faith any opinion respecting the merits
of any performance which its author has submitted to the judgment of
the public, or respecting the character of the author so far as his
character appears in such performance, and no farther.

Explanation.-A performance may be submitted to the judgment of
the public expressly or by acts on the part of the author which imply
such submission to the judgment of the public.

Illustrations

(a) A person who publishes a book, submits that book to the
judgment of the public.

(b) A person who makes a speech in public, submits that speech to
the judgment of the public.

(c) An actor or singer who appears on a public stage, submits his
acting or singing to the judgment of the public.

214

(d) A says of a book published by Z-"Z's book is foolish; Z must
be a weak man. Z's book is indecent; Z must be a man of impure mind."
A is within the exception, if he says this in good faith, inasmuch as
the opinion which he expresses of Z respects Z's character only so far
as it appears in Z's book, and no further.

(e) But if A says-"I am not surprised that Z's book is foolish
and indecent, for he is a weak man and a libertine." A is not within
this exception, inasmuch as the opinion which he expresses of Z's
character is an opinion not founded on Z's book.

Seventh Exception.-Censure passed in good faith by person having
lawful authority over another.-It is not defamation in a person having
over another any authority, either conferred by law or arising out of
a lawful contract made with that other, to pass in good faith any
censure on the conduct of that other in matters to which such lawful
authority relates.

Illustration

A Judge censuring in good faith the conduct of a witness, or of
an officer of the Court; a head of a department censuring in good
faith those who are under his orders; a parent censuring in good faith
a child in the presence of other children; a schoolmaster, whose
authority is derived from a parent, censuring in good faith a pupil in
the presence of other pupils; a master censuring a servant in good



faith for
cashier of

remissness
his bank

in service; a
for the condu

are within this exception.

B

fighth
authorised person

authority over
accusation.

If A
faith complains
good faith

that person

in good
of the conduct of Z,
complains of the conduct of Z,

Exception.—Accusation
--It
accusation against

is not def
any person to
with r

faith accuses

within this exception.

Nint
protectio
an
be made
making

h
n of

i
it,

(a) A,
nothing to
his honesty."
imputation on Z

A

(b)
officer,

A,
casts

the exception.

Tenth Except

Exception.—-Imputation
other's interests.-It is not defamation to make
imputation on the character of another provided that the imputation
n good faith for the protectio
or of any other person,

his or

a shopkeeper,
Z unless he pays you ready

in
a Magistrate,

an
imputation is made

m

Illustr
says to

is within the
good faith for t

in maki
imputation ont
in good faith, a

ion.-Caution inte

conveyed or
caution, in
such caution
conveyed, or
the public good.

good
be

215

500.

for public

intended
of some person in whom that person is

good.- It
to one pe
for the

faith,

Punishment for defamation.

500.
punished with

Punishment for defamation.
simple imprisonment

years,

501.

or with fine,

or with both.

banker censuring in good faith the
ct of such cashier as such cashier-

preferred
amation

any
espect

in good faith to
to prefer in good faith an
those who have lawful
the subject-matter of

of
to

llustration

Z before a Magistrate; if A in good
a servant, to Z's master;if A in
a child, to Z's father-A is

ade in good faith by person for

n of the interest of the person

or for the public good.

ations
who manages his business-"Sell
money, for I have no opinion of
exception, if he has made this
he protection of his own interests.

B,

ng areport to his own superior
he character of 2Z. Here, if the
nd for the public good, A is within

nded for good of
is not defamation
rson against another,
good of the person
interested,

person to whom
to convey a
provided that
to whom it is
or for

Whoever defames another shall be
for a term which may extend to two



Printing ore

501. Pri
Whoever print
t

to believe
ith

nti
s
hat

ngraving matter k

ng
or engraves
such matter

punished w
years, or wit

502.

Sale of printed or

502. Sal

h £

simple imprison
or with both.

ine,

e

or engravi
a

nown to be defamatory.

known to be defamatory.-—-—
ny matter, knowing or having good reason
is defamatory of any person, shall be
ment for a term which may extend to two

ng matter

ngraved substance containing defamatory matter.

of printed or

matter .—-—-Who

matter, shall

may extend to two years,

CHAPT!

ER XXII

OF CRIMINAL INTIMIDATION,

ver sells
substance containing

b

OF CRIMINAL INTIMIDATION,

e punished
or w

W

or offers
defamatory matter,

ngraved substance containing defamatory
for sale any printed or engraved
knowing that it contains such
imprisonment for a term which

ith simple

ith fine, or with both.

INSULT AND ANNOYANC!

Gl

CHAPTER XXII

INSULT AND ANNOYANC!

Gl

503.
Criminal intimidation.

503. Criminal intimidation.--Whoever threatens another with any
injury to his person, reputation or property, or to the person or

reputation of
to cause ala
which he is
that person
execution of

a
rm
no
is
su

t

Cc

on

person in wh

section.

A, for

Explanati

om

the

ny one in whom that person is interested, with intent

to that person, or to cause that person to do any act
legally bound to do, or to omit to do any act which

legally entitled to do, as the means of avoiding the

h threat, commits criminal intimidation.

.-A threat to injure the reputation of any deceased

the person threatened is interested, is within this

Tllustration
purpose of inducing B to resist from prosecuting a


civil suit, threatens to burn B's house. A is guilty of criminal

int

504.

imidation.

Intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of the peace.

504. Intentiona insult with intent to provoke breach of the

peac

Whoever intentionally insults, and thereby gives provocation

to any person, intending or knowing it to be likely that such
provocation will cause him to break the public peace, or to commit any

other offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or
with both.

505.

Statements conducing public mischief.

1*[505. Statements conducing public mischief.--2*[(1)]

Whoever makes, publishes or circulates any statement, rumour or

report, -

(a) with intent to cause, or which is likely to cause, any
officer, soldier, 3*[sailor or airman] in the Army, 4* [Navy
or Air Force] 5*fof India] to mutiny or otherwise disregard or
fail in his duty as such; or

(b) with intent to cause, or which is likely to cause, fear
or alarm to the public, or to any section of the public whereby
any person may be induced to commit an offence against the State
or against the public tranquility; or

216

Subs. by Act 4 of 1898, s. 6, for the original section.
Renumbered by Act 35 of 1969, s. 3.

Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and Such. I, for "or sailor".

Subs. by s. 2 and Sch. i. ibid., for "or navy".

Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for "of Her Majesty or in the Imperial

Service Troops". The words "or in the Royal Indian Marine"
occurring after the word "Majesty" were rep. by Act 35 of 1934.

(c) with intent to incite, or which is likely to incite, any
class or community of persons to commit any offence against any
other class or community,



shall be
years],

Pp
or

2*[ (2)
will betwee
statement o
create or p
of religion
community o
or ill-will
groups or

unished with
with fine,

Statements creating

imprisonment which
or with both.

Who

or promoting

n classes.
r
romote,
race,

any other

,
r

castes or

report containing
or which
place

ver

Ls

makes,
rumour or a
ikely to create

pub

enmity,
lishes
arming news with intent to

[e)

of bir

communities,

which may extend to three years,

(3) Of

etc.—--Whoever commits
worship or
religious worship

place of

imprisonmen

under sub-section

fenc

t which may

th,

residence,
ground whatsoever,
between different religious,

fee
racia

or with fine,

(2)

an offenc
in any
or religious

ass

extend

1,

xr

may extend to 1*[three

circulates

or promote,
language,
lings of en
anguage

bot

committed in place

specified in sub-sectio

embly engaged

ceremonies,

in the
shall
to five years and shall al

b

e pu

cas
mity,

Nn.

(2)

n

nished
so be

te
hat

in

performance

W
lia

hatred or ill-

any

on grounds

or
red

or regional
shall be punished with imprisonment
or with

of worship,

any
of
ith
ble

to fine.]

Exception.-It does not amount to an offence, within the meaning
of this section, when the person making, publishing or circulating any
such statement, rumour or report, has reasonable grounds for believing
that such statement, rumour or report is true and makes, publishes or
circulates it 2[in good faith and] without any such intent as
aforesaid. |]

506.
Punishment for criminal intimidation.

506. Punishment for crimina intimidation.--Whoever commits the
offence of criminal intimidation sha be punished with imprisonment
of either description for aterm which may extend to two years, or

with fine,

or with both;

If threat be to cause death or grievous hurt,

If thr

may extend
be punished

507.

Criminal

eat be to

to seven

cause death
threat be to cause death or grievous hurt,
of any property by fire,
or 3*[imprisonment for life],
years,
with imprisonment
may extend to seven years,

or with fine,

etc.

intimidation by an anonymous communication.

or grievous hurt,

etc.--and if the

for

a term

de
wh
sh
wh

or to cause the destruction
or to cause an offence punishable with
of with imprisonment
or to impute unchastity to a woman,
of either description for a term
or with both.

ath
ich
all
ich



507. Criminal intimidation by an anonymous communication.--—
Whoever commits the offence of criminal intimidation by an anonymous
communication, or having taken precaution to conceal the name or abode
of the person from whom the threat comes, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two
years, in addition to the punishment provided for the offence by the
last preceding section.

508.

Act caused by inducing person to believe that he will be rendered an
object of the Divine displeasure.

508. Act caused by inducing person to believe that he will be
rendered an object of the Divine displeasure.--Whoever voluntarily
causes or attempts to cause any person to do anything which that
person is not legally bound to do, or to omit to do anything which he
is legally entitled to do, by inducing or attempting to induce that
person to believe that he or any person in whom he is interested will
become or wi be rendered by some act of the offender an object of
Divine displeasure if he does not do the thing which it is the object
of the offender to cause him to do, or if he does the thing which it
is the object of the offender to cause him to omit, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
one year, or with fine, or with both.

1. Subs. by Act 41 of 1961, s. 4, for "two years".

2. Ins. by Act 35 of 1969, s. 3.

3. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation".
217

Illustrations

(a) A sits dhurna at Z's door with the intention of causing
it to be believed that, by so sitting, he renders 2 an object of
Divine displeasure. A has committed the offenc defined in this
section.

(bob) A threatens Z that, unless Z performs a certain act, A will
ki one of A's own children, under such circumstances that the
killing would be believed to render Z an object of Divine displeasure.
A has committed the offence defined in this section.

509.

Word, gesture or act intended to insult the modesty of a woman.


509. Word, gesture or act intended to insult the modesty of a
woman.--Whoever, intending to insult the modesty of any woman, utters
any word, makes any sound or gesture, or exhibits any object,
intending that such word or sound shall be heard, or that such gesture
or object shall be seen, by such woman, or intrudes upon the privacy
of such woman, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term
which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.

510.

Misconduct in public by a drunken person.

510. Misconduct in public by a drunken person.--Whoever, ina
state of intoxication, appears in any public place, or in any place
which it is a trespass in him to enter, and there conducts himself in

such a manner as to cause annoyance to any person, shall be punished
with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to twenty-four
hours, or with fine which may extend to ten rupees, or with both.

CHAPTER XXIII

r

OF ATTEMPTS TO COMMIT OFFENCES

CHAPTER XXIII

OF ATTEMPTS TO COMMIT OFFENCES

511.

Punishment for attempting to commit offences punishable with
imprisonment for life or other imprisonment.

511. Punishment for attempting to commit offences punishable with
imprisonment for life or other imprisonment.--Whoever attempts to
commit an offence punishable by this Code with 1*[imprisonment for
life] or imprisonment, or to cause such an offence to be committed,
and in such attempt does any act towards the commission of the
offence, shall, where no xpress provision is made by this Code for
the punishment of such attempt, be punished with 2*[imprisonment o f
any description provided for the offence, for a term which may extend
to one-half of the imprisonment for life or, as the case may be, one-
half of the longest term of imprisonment provided for that offence],
or with such fine as is provided for the offence, or with both.

Illustrations

(a) A makes an attempt to steal some jewels by breaking open a
box, and finds after so opening the box, that there is no jewel in it.


He has done an act towards the commission of theft, and therefore is
guilty under this section.

(ob) A makes an attempt to pick the pocket of Z by thrusting his
hand into Z's pocket. A fails in the attempt in consequence of Z's
having nothing in his pocket. A is guilty under this section.

1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation".
2. Subs. by s. 117 and Sch., ibid., for certain words.
